Wow, I think I need to pinch myself, because I never imagined that we would be here today, ten years into the journey of establishing the African Leadership Academy.

I stand before you here today as a mere servant of a vision that is bigger than any one of us, and as a servant of a journey that many of us have been on through thick and thin for the last decade. We're celebrating today not just ten years of ALA's journey, but really we're here to celebrate the very future of our continent. And I'm overjoyed with the tremendous belief that all of you are showing by coming from all over the world to be with us today.

Now, before we get started, I think I need to clarify something: ALA has been in operation for ten full years, and that's what we're celebrating today. We have admitted 10 classes and we've trained almost a thousand young leaders. However, if we want to be completely accurate, the journey of establishing ALA actually started 14 years ago when Chris and I graduated from Stanford. We began working on this in 2004, so it's actually 14 years since the whole project started.

Today, I want to share with you three stories about this journey that we've been on—just three stories.

The first story is about Opportunity.

In 2008, I was invited to give a keynote address at Harvard Business School's Africa Business Conference. At the end of this conference, I announced that we were selecting the first class to join us at the African Leadership Academy. At the end of the conference, there was a closing party—an invitation-only event for speakers and special guests. In the middle of the event, this young, scrawny white man came up to me, and he was shaking as he was talking to me. He introduced himself; he said his name was Eric Ljungstrom, and he was with an organization called Educate!. He had traveled all the way from New York to see me because he heard I was going to be at this conference. He didn't have an invitation, but he had someone sneak him in because he wanted to tell me about a young man called Joseph Munyambanza.

He told me this young man was a refugee from the Congo living in a refugee camp in Uganda, and he had built an amazing organization in his refugee camp to help educate other young people, providing healthcare services and all these things. He said, "We have to admit this guy; he's applied to your first class." So I said, "Okay, fine," and I took his name.

I then went back home and looked through our admissions files, and unfortunately, this young man was set to be rejected because his grades were not good enough. But then I thought further: if this person had so inspired someone to come and sneak into a party to tell me about him, there must be something special about this kid.

And so we admitted him. Today, ten years on, Joseph Munyambanza is serving on the UN Secretary-General's Advisory Council for Youth. He has expanded his organization, built schools in his refugee camp, trained thousands of young people, and he recently told me that he was working on a project with the Minister of Education from the Congo to get a million young children back into school in the DRC. On WhatsApp, he is in contact with Nobel Prize winners like Malala Yousafzai.

I tell you this story because it illustrates three things:
First, it illustrates what happens when you give young people with talent and depth an opportunity. This is really what we do at ALA: we find young people with potential, give them opportunities to develop, and then plug them into powerful networks so that they can take their impact and expand it at a much larger scale.

Second, it's a powerful reminder to me about just how much talent there is on this continent that unfortunately doesn't get these opportunities. I believe that talent is evenly distributed throughout the world, but opportunity is not. It is our job to try and find young people and give them that opportunity.

Third, the story reminds me of just how far we've come as ALA as an institution—from a refugee camp to advising the UN Secretary-General, being on a first-name basis with Nobel Prize winners, running his own organization, and sponsoring young people to go to school and get opportunities like he had, all in just 10 years. This to me is a real sign of the progress that we have made as an institution.

The second story I'd like to tell is about Faith.

You may have heard earlier today about how things got so bad in the early days financially that we were constantly running out of money. When I graduated from Stanford Business School, I had to come up with $120,000 to pay back McKinsey, and I had to borrow money from my mother. In those days, I had no salary, so for two years what I would do was schedule a meeting at breakfast, one at lunch, and one at dinner. Because I was a poor, starving entrepreneur, the people who took me out would typically cover the bill!

The other people on the team had also not been paid. I remember one particular day when I was in New York and I took a train from New York to New Jersey to go and see a donor to ask them for money. As it would have it, I didn't get the money that day. Unfortunately, I was so broke that I didn't even have money to get the train back to New York! Here I was in New Jersey, looking at the skyscrapers on the other side of the river, remembering how my classmates from Stanford Business School were all sitting in those skyscrapers earning hundreds of thousands of dollars, and I didn't have train fare to get back to the other side.

Things got so bad that the founders called a meeting and said, "We're going to shut down this project. Everyone has to go home, the team has to get other jobs." We agreed that in two months, everything would stop if we didn't get any support.

A month later, we were looking for sites that could potentially be the campus for the Academy. We went to a building in the Cradle of Humankind where there was a conference center, and we asked to rent it. They said, "We don't have space here, but why don't you go next door? There's a property that maybe you can use."

So we went next door, and we said, "Why did they send us here? This is just a farm, there's nothing here that we can use for the Academy." But the person who managed the farm said, "The person who owns this property is very interested in education, so why don't you send us a little write-up about what you're doing?"

So we put together a one-pager—literally one sentence about the vision for the Academy, and the rest listing our needs for rooms and beds—and we sent it off. It turned out that land was owned by an angel called Rebecca Oppenheimer.

She saw this note and said, "Well, I don't have a property that you can use for your Academy, but I'm willing to build it for you!"

We said, "Well, does she know how much it's going to cost to build this?" Chris and I flew up to Seattle to see her, and we met her. She didn't know who we were, but she committed $5 million!

Two months before the whole project was to be shut down, Rebecca came into our lives. She has since continued to support us and has become the single largest individual donor to the African Leadership Academy, and we honestly would not be here without her.

What that really tells me is that in the pursuit of a big goal, there will be many times when it will appear completely impossible. None of it was logical. Why were we sent to an empty farm when there was no place to use for a campus? And why did she trust two young guys that she had never met? It's completely unexplainable, but what this really tells me is the importance of having faith, and that sometimes when things are meant to happen, they just do.

The third story I want to tell is about Partnership.

I really believe that great accomplishments are never achieved alone, and ALA is no different. It has drawn on the strengths and energies of people from all over the world. Thousands of people have given blood, sweat, and tears to get us to this point. ALA really shows me the power of humanity and collaboration.

About 5,000 schools across Africa have over the years become our partners, feeding us talented young people to become part of our community; 200 staff members have worked with us over the years; over 100 university partners take our graduates after they leave us and give them opportunities; corporate partners give them internships; guest speakers come to campus to inspire them; host families and parents, especially that first class of parents... when 1,700 young people applied to a school with no track record, what were those parents thinking to let their children apply to a school with no track record? We owe deep gratitude to this group.

Since inception, this project has attracted about $150 million USD from donors all around the world—foundations and individuals. In Rand terms, that's about 2 billion Rand invested in this project. While thousands of donors have contributed, just 100 individuals and foundations have contributed over 95% of this total—the "Club of 100" who have been so instrumental in making this happen.

And of course, the MasterCard Foundation, represented by Rita Roy, made a huge commitment of $50 million to building this institution.

As we look forward to the next ten years, I hope we reflect on the importance of building strong African institutions such as the African Leadership Academy. One thing we're very good at doing in Africa is starting projects. The continent is littered with projects that all had good intentions, but they died after those who started them lost energy, or after those who initially funded them stopped funding them.

Institutions are organizations that are much beyond any one person. They live on, they assume a life of their own, and they continue achieving the vision that has been set out over many generations and over many centuries.

As we look forward to the next ten years, my one wish is that we will continue to build this African institution and all of its affiliates: the African Leadership Network, the African Leadership University, the African Leadership Finance Corporation, the ALX fellowship... What you see here at ALA is really the center of an ecosystem of many other institutions that are being built to ultimately develop 3 million leaders for the continent of Africa over the next 50 years. But it all started with ALA.

As we continue building this broader movement of leadership, the three things that it will require are for us to continue giving opportunity to young people like Joseph, to continue to have faith that it will come to fruition, and that we need to keep doing this in partnership with all of you.

Thank you for a wonderful ten years, and here's to another amazing ten years and 50 years ahead! Thank you.