At the age of six, Joseph Munyambanza found himself here—it's a refugee camp in Uganda. He had fled here together with about 23,000 inhabitants from countries like the Congo, Sudan, Rwanda, and Burundi. He was alone, he was bewildered, and several thousand kilometers from his home.

In this community of 23,000 people, there were only two primary schools and one secondary school. And so, as you can imagine, access to quality education was not very prevalent in the community, and the schools were overcrowded. Very few people had access to high-quality education.

Now, Joseph was spotted by a non-profit organization that was working in the community as someone who had talent, and they sponsored him to go to a school outside of the refugee camp. Joseph felt so bad that he was the only one who had access to high-quality education that he decided he would do something about it.

And so began a program where, on the weekends, he would get together with his peers and they would go and work as laborers on farms nearby, raise money, and use that to sponsor others in the refugee camp to go to schools outside of the camp as well. Soon he was sponsoring 10 young people in his community to go to school. He was 14 years old.

He kept doing this every weekend—they'd go work as laborers, raise more money—and soon, by the age of 17, he was sponsoring 52 children in his refugee camp to go to school.

Now at this point, January or February 2008, we were selecting the first class to join the African Leadership Academy. So we went around the entire continent looking for young people that we believed could transform Africa—people with courage, determination, and passion to really change the continent forever.

But I didn't hear about Joseph in those travels. I actually learned about Joseph when I was speaking at the Harvard Africa Business Forum, something similar to this. Just like what's going to happen after this, there's an afterparty. So I was hanging out at the afterparty, and this scrawny white guy comes up to me and he says, "You know, I didn't even pay to be at this conference, but I snuck into this party because I heard you were going to be here. There's this young man in this refugee camp in Uganda that my organization sponsors—he's amazing." And he went on, and the way he was talking about this guy, he sounded like a saint.

So I said, "No, this is too good to be true."

So I went back to South Africa, looked through the files of all the applicants, and read this guy's story. And yes, it was exactly what Eric had said about him. And so we admitted Joseph into the first class of the African Leadership Academy.

Now, one of the things that happens at the Academy, in addition to educating these young people and training them to be transformative leaders for Africa, is we bring different leaders and speakers onto campus all the time to interact and share their experiences with these young people. One day, a woman came and shared the work that she was doing to help people overcome trauma using theater as the way to do this.

Joseph said, "You know, people in my refugee camp could really use you," and invited her to come and spend a few days with him during his summer holidays at the end of the first year. So she went, saw what he was doing, and fell in love with his project. During Joseph's second year, she helped him to raise about $10,000, and so Joseph built a school in the refugee camp in his second year at ALA and began educating 243 orphans.

June 2010: Joseph graduates from the African Leadership Academy. But unfortunately, he wasn't able to get a scholarship to go on to university. He had been admitted, but didn't have enough funding to go to university. So he went back to his refugee camp and kept working on his projects, educating more young people, educating these orphans.

One of the organizations I started was something called the African Leadership Network. The African Leadership Network is an association of young leaders from across Africa who are a little bit more established than the ones at the African Leadership Academy—people in their 20s, 30s, and 40s. Once again, we bring these leaders together so they can forge relationships with each other and actually do things together. About 70% of the people that we bring are Africans living on the continent, 20% are Africans living in the diaspora, and 10% are non-Africans who are doing interesting things in Africa.

Now, Joseph shared his vision for education and what he was doing in the refugee camp. He had a vision specifically to rent a hostel outside of the refugee camp so that some of the young people from there could get access to high-quality schools outside of the refugee camp. Remember I said that there was only one secondary school in the refugee camp, and it only went up to 10th grade.

So this is what happened when Joseph spoke at the African Leadership Network in 2012:

"We plan to take 110 students into high school, and to do this, we need $13,000 US dollars. I'm sure $13,000 US..."

"Two or three mentors in this room today... Young man from Congo, I'm going to commit the $13,000. This will be from a client by the name of Curtis Jackson, who has a huge initiative to work in Africa, and on his behalf, thank you so much for this opportunity to help."

Now, who here knows who Curtis Jackson is? That's right—50 Cent!

He had been sponsored by 50 Cent, and soon he was able to get an additional 100 young people into school. He was sponsoring now 343 young people to go to school.

After a few more months of doing this, he was able to get a scholarship and ended up attending a university in the US called Westminster College. So Joseph now is in his second year at Westminster College in Missouri. He's continuing to run his program in the refugee camp, and today he controls an organization with a budget of $186,000 and 10 full-time employees.

What I especially am excited about is that he's begun sponsoring some people from his refugee camp to universities. At Westminster, where he is right now, there's a freshman there who came from his refugee camp and was one of the participants in his program. He sent a student to the University of Rochester, including the first girl ever to graduate and go to university from the refugee camp.

And especially dear to me, he sent two students who have come to the African Leadership Academy—Tia and Jean—who also came from his program.

As a result of all this work, Joseph recently was introduced to former UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown, who, as you know, is now the UN Special Envoy on Education. He has also been invited and serves as one of 15 young people on the UN Secretary-General's Special Advisory Council for Youth on Education.

Joseph sent me an email in September telling me about how he had spent his summer holiday. He talked about how he had gone back to the Congo—he hadn't been there for many years—and as a result of connections that he has with Gordon Brown and the UN Secretary-General, he met with the Chief of Staff to the President, the Minister of Education, and his entire cabinet. He identified that there are 7 million children in the Congo who are out of school, and his objective was to see how he could get 1 million of these young people into school.

The first step towards that: at the end of the summer, the Minister of Education of Congo expanded the education budget by 20%, and they are now well on their way to his goal of 1 million.

Now, if this is not a ripple effect, I don't know what is! He went from, within a scope of five years, touching 10 people to 52, to 242, to 343, and now 1 million—and he's only 22 years old.

The example of Joseph really illustrates what I believe is one of the most powerful ripple effects that we can ever have in any society, and that is the impact of leaders.

Now, one might think that, of course, leaders make a difference in every society. But I believe that in Africa, more than anywhere else in the world, just one person, one good leader, can have much more impact in Africa than anywhere else in the world. And here's why.

There's something called institutions that exist in every society. Institutions are the rules and the systems that govern how a society functions. These are things like your constitution, the media, the judiciary, the parliamentary system—all of those things.

The rule that I believe is that the stronger the institutions in a given country, the less effect one single leader can have in that country. And therefore, by the inverse of that, the weaker the institutions in a country, the much, much more powerful effect that just one person can have in that society.

When you look at a developed country like the UK, your parliament—Big Ben—you walk past that place, it's been around for 500 years. You look at the US, it's got very developed systems. So if you become the President of the United States and you think, "Oh, I've arrived, I'm the most powerful man in the world," and you decide, "Okay, I think Americans should get healthcare, I'm going to pass a law to make this possible," you go to the Senate, they say, "No, no, no, you can't do that." You go to Congress, they say, "No, you can't do that."

If you decide that you want to become president for life, there's a 300-year-old constitution that will stop that. There's a very powerful police force that will come and take you out of that Oval Office. If you decide you want to print money and you call Ben Bernanke or Alan Greenspan, the central bank governor, they'll say, "Are you smoking crack?"

You come to Africa, the situation is different. If you are the president of Zimbabwe and you decide that, "You know what, I just want to stay in power forever," there's no constitution that's going to stop you, and you just stay there on and on and on like the Energizer Bunny. If you decide that you want to print money and you call your central bank governor, the guy will say, "Okay, yes sir, how much do you need?" And as a result, hyperinflation ensues in that country.

And so the lack of these institutions in Africa has meant that our leaders have had tremendous impact on us. Just one person, like Robert Mugabe, can destroy an entire country. And this is why I say that leaders in Africa can have much more impact than anywhere else in the world. They are really the ultimate ripple effect in Africa.

This is why myself and my peers were really inspired to develop the African Leadership Academy, when we realized that this was the single biggest thing that was holding us back from achieving our potential as Africans—the quality of the leaders that we have.

We said, "Do we just sit back and hope that one day we get good leaders, or can we create a system, a machine that can actually find young people and develop them—hundreds and thousands of young people like Joseph who each, in their own way..."

When I was growing up, I grew up in different parts of Africa, and everywhere I went, I saw we had different problems: healthcare, infrastructure, poverty, housing, sanitation. It was overwhelming. Where would I start?

But I thought: there's no way in my lifetime that I can try and tackle all these things. But if I can produce a set of leaders—and those leaders, this one will take infrastructure, that one will take politics, this one will take healthcare, this one will take education—each and every one of them in their way will go out and they will become the leaders that can really transform Africa.

As I mentioned, just one leader in Africa can have a very, very powerful effect on that society, and that's really what inspired the African Leadership Academy. Today, we get several thousand applications, and we pick only a hundred people. You might say, "How can a hundred people change Africa?" I say that we don't need a lot of people to transform Africa; we just need a few good leaders.

So when you walk into the walls of the African Leadership Academy, everywhere there's a quote that I like that is all over the place. It's my favorite quote. It says:

"Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world; indeed, it's the only thing that ever has."

I believe in Africa, I would rewrite that statement to say:

"Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed leaders can change Africa; indeed, it's the only thing that ever will."

Thank you.