Mid-Term Evaluation 
of the Jobs for Youth in Africa 
Strategy 2016–2025
Summary Report
November 2023
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
IDEV conducts different types 
of evaluations to achieve its 
strategic objectives
Thematic Evaluations Project Cluster Evaluations
Regional Integration Strategy 
 
Evaluations
PCR and XSR Validation Syntheses
Impact Evaluations
Project Performance Evaluations
Country Strategy Evaluations
Evaluation Syntheses
Corporate Evaluations
Sector Evaluations
Thematic Evaluations
Mid-Term Evaluation 
of the Jobs for Youth in Africa 
Strategy 2016–2025
Summary Report
November 2023
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
© 2023 African Development Bank Group 
All rights reserved – Published, November 2023
 Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report 
IDEV Thematic Evaluation, November 2023
Disclaimer
Unless expressly stated otherwise, the findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this publication are those of the various authors of the publication and are not necessarily those of the 
Management of the African Development Bank (the “Bank”) and the African Development Fund (the “Fund”), Boards of Directors, Boards of Governors or the countries they represent.
Use of this publication is at the reader’s sole risk. The content of this publication is provided without warranty of any kind, either express or implied, including without limitation warranties 
of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, and non- infringement of third-party rights. The Bank specifically does not make any warranties or representations as to the accuracy, 
completeness, reliability or current validity of any information contained in the publication. Under no circumstances including, but not limited to, negligence, shall the Bank be liable for 
any loss, damage, liability or expense incurred or suffered which is claimed to result directly or indirectly from use of this publication or reliance on its content.
This publication may contain advice, opinions, and statements of various information and content providers. The Bank does not represent or endorse the accuracy, completeness, reliability 
or current validity of any advice, opinion, statement or other information provided by any information or content provider or other person or entity. Reliance upon any such opinion, advice, 
statement, or other information shall also be at the reader’s own risk.
About the AfDB
The overarching objective of the African Development Bank Group is to spur sustainable economic development and social progress in its regional member countries (RMCs), thus 
contributing to poverty reduction. The Bank Group achieves this objective by mobilizing and allocating resources for investment in RMCs and providing policy advice and technical 
assistance to support development efforts.
About Independent Development Evaluation (IDEV)
The mission of Independent Development Evaluation at the AfDB is to enhance the development effectiveness of the institution in its regional member countries through independent and 
instrumental evaluations and partnerships for sharing knowledge.
Independent Development Evaluation (IDEV) 
African Development Bank Group
Avenue Joseph Anoma, 01 BP 1387, Abidjan, 01 Côte d’Ivoire 
Phone: +225 27 20 26 28 41
E-mail: idevhelpdesk@afdb.org 
idev.afdb.org 
Design & layout: CRÉON – www.creondesign.net
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Task managers: Girma Earo Kumbi, Chief Evaluation Officer, IDEV.2; May Esther Mwaka, Principal Evaluation Officer, IDEV.2
Team member: Eric Olaniran Yai, Evaluation Officer, IDEV.2
Consultant: Genesis Analytics
Internal peer reviewers: Andrew Ajuang Anguko, Chief Quality and Methods Adviser, IDEV.0; Eustace Uzor, Evaluation Officer, IDEV.1
External peer reviewer: Louise Fox, Consultant
Internal Bank Reference 
Group:
Eric K. Ogunleye, Division Manager, ECAD.2; Andinet Woldemichael, Principal Research Economist, ECMR.1; 
Roza Bora, Principal Statistician, ECST.1; Ann Sow Dao, Chief Capacity Development Officer, ECAD.3; Stefan Muller, 
Lead Country Program Coordinator, RDVP/RDSA; Alain Pierre Mbonampeka, Lead Country Program Coordinator, 
RDSA; Salma Salum, Principal Country Program Officer, RGDE; Linguere Mbaye, Principal Fragility and Resilience 
Officer, RDTS; Rudolphe Petras, Principal Results Officer, SNDR.1; Thierno Diarra, Principal Solutions Architect, PITD; 
Issouf M’para Coulibaly, Senior Investment Officer, PIFD; Pierre Justin Kouka, Advisor, AHVP; Tapera Muzira, Lead 
Human Capital, Youth and Skills Development, AHHD.0; Rosemond Offei-Awuku, Chief Development Economist, 
AHHD.0; Raymond Besong, Chief Development Economist, AHHD.3; Youssouf Kabore, Chief Livestock Officer, AHAI.1; 
Gerald Esambe Njume, Principal Climate Change and Green Growth Officer, PECG
External Evaluation 
Reference Group member:
Peter van Rooij, Deputy Regional Director, International Labour Organization
Knowledge management and 
communications officers:
Maria R. Muzaaki, Knowledge Management Consultant, IDEV.3; Najade Lindsay, Knowledge Management Officer, 
IDEV.3; Kate Stoney, Senior Communications Officer, IDEV.3
Other assistance/
contributions provided by:
Parfait Kouassi, Team Assistant, IDEV.2; Ruby Adzobu-Agyare, Secretary, IDEV.0; Olivier Coste, Principal Solutions 
Officer, TCIS.1
Special thanks to: Government Officials and Executing Agencies from Senegal, Malawi, Kenya, Morocco and the Democratic Republic 
of Congo, Youth, AfDB Staff, Development Partners, Private Sector Organizations and Civil Society Actors who made 
themselves available for consultation and survey during the study.
Division Manager: Madhusoodhanan Mampuzhasseril, IDEV.2
Evaluator-General: Karen Rot-Münstermann
Acronyms and Abbreviations v
Executive Summary 1
Management Response 9
Introduction 17
Evaluation Purpose, Objectives, and Scope 17
Evaluation Approach and Methodology 18
Evaluation Limitations 19
Overview of Youth Employment Landscape in Africa  21
Status of Youth Employment – Statistics and Trends 21
Key Challenges and Opportunities to Youth Employment in Africa 22
Overview of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 25
Strategy Goals, Approaches and Levers 25
Portfolio Overview 26
Findings 29
Relevance  29
Coherence 32
Effectiveness 34
Adequacy of Bank Systems, Resources and Operations to Support Achievement  
of Youth Employment Outcomes 45
Sustainability 50
Conclusions, Lessons and Recommendations 55
Conclusions 55
Lessons 56
Recommendations 57
Annexes 59
Contents
Contents
List of figures
Figure 1 Youth Unemployment Rates Across Regions, 2000–2020 21
Figure 2 Rate of Working Poverty Across the Globe, 1991–2020 21
List of tables
Table 1 Direct and Indirect Jobs Expected to be Created 35
Table 2 Flagship Program and Project Summary Results 41
List of boxes
Box 1 The Bank’s Jobs and Skills Marker System 11
Box 2 The AfDB Gender Marker 37
Box 3 Examples of Enabling Environment Activities 39
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Acronyms and Abbreviations
ADER Annual Development Effectiveness Review
ADF African Development Fund
ADOA Additionality and Development Outcomes 
Assessment Framework
AFAWA Affirmative Finance Action for Women 
in Africa
AFD Agence Francaise de Développement
AfDB  African Development Bank Group
AGF Africa Guarantee Fund
AHAI Agriculture and Agro-Industry 
Department 
AHHD Human Capital, Youth and Skills 
Development Department
AHVP Vice Presidency, Agriculture, Human and 
Social Development
AU African Union
BII British International Investment 
BIO Belgian Investment Company for 
Developing Countries
BDS Business Development Services
CfE Coding for Employment
COVID-19 Coronavirus Disease 2019
CRF COVID-19 Response Fund
CSP Country Strategy Paper
DFIs Development Finance Institutions
DRC Democratic Republic of Congo
ECAD African Development Institute
ECMR  Macroeconomic Policy, Forecasting 
and Research Department 
ECST Statistics Department 
ENABLE Empowering Novel Agri-Business-Led 
Employment
ESO Enterprise Support Organization
ESW Economic and Sector Work
EUR Euro
EY ENABLE Youth
EYE Enabling Youth Employment 
FIRM Resource Mobilization and Partnerships 
Department
FY  Financial Year
GCI General Capital Increase 
GDP Gross Domestic Product
IFAD International Fund for Agricultural 
Development 
IFIs International Financial Institutions
IDEV Independent Development Evaluation
I-DICE Investment in Digital and Creative 
Enterprises Program
ISP Institutional Support Project
ILO International Labour Organization 
IT/ICT Information Technology / Information, 
Communication and Technology
JfYA Jobs for Youth in Africa
JIM Joint Impact Model 
JSMS Jobs and Skills Marker System 
KFW Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
KII  Key Informant Interview / Interviewee
KPI Key Performance Indicator
LIC Low Income Country
LMIS Labour Market information system 
LoC Line of Credit
MDB Multilateral Development Bank
MTE Mid-Term Evaluation
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise 
NEET Not in Employment, Education or Training 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NSO Non-Sovereign Operation
OECD/DAC Organization for Economic Co-operation 
and Development/ Development 
Assistance Committee
OeEB Development Bank of Austria
PAR Project Appraisal Report
PBO  Program-Based Operation
PCER Communication & External Relations 
Department 
PECG Climate Change and Green Growth 
Department
PEVP  Vice Presidency, Power, Energy, Climate 
and Green Growth
PGCL General Counsel and Legal Services 
Department
PIVP Vice Presidency, Private Sector, 
Infrastructure and Industrialization
PIDG Private Infrastructure Development Group 
PCR Project Completion Report
PSD Private Sector Development
PTCE Talent, Performance and Staff 
Development Department 
PTVP Vice President People and Talent 
Management
PYAG Presidential Youth Advisory Group
RDVP Vice Presidency, Regional Development, 
Integration and Business Delivery
RISP Regional Integration Strategy Paper 
RMC Regional Member Country
RMF Results Measurement Framework 
SAP Systems Applications and Products
SAPZ Special Agro-Processing Zones 
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SECO State Secretariat for Economic Affairs 
SEPA Skills for Employability and Productivity 
in Africa
SMEs Small and Medium Enterprises 
SSA Sub-Saharan Africa 
SNDR  Development Impact and Results 
Department
SNPB Programming and Budget Department 
SNSP Strategy and Operational Policies 
Department
SNVP  Senior Vice Presidency
TCIS Corporate Information Technology 
Services Department 
TCVP Vice President Technology & Corporate 
Services
ToC Theory of Change
TSF  Transition Support Fund
TVET Technical and Vocational Education 
and Training 
TYS Ten-Year Strategy of the African 
Development Bank 2013–2022
UA*  Unit of Account
UN United Nations
USD United States Dollar
USAID United States Agency for International 
Development
XSR Expanded Supervision Report
XSRENs Expanded Supervision Report Evaluation  
Notes
YEIB Youth Entrepreneurship and Investment 
Bank
YEI MTDF Youth Entrepreneurship and Innovation 
Multi-Donor Trust Fund
*  1 Unit of Account (UA) = 1.39959 United States Dollars (USD), as at January 2022

1
Executive Summary
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Executive Summary
Background and Methodology
In 2021, the African Development Bank Group’s (AfDB 
or “the Bank”) Independent Development Evaluation 
(IDEV) embarked on a mid-term evaluation of the Bank’s 
Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 (JfYA 
Strategy). The JfYA Strategy aims to create 25 million 
jobs and positively impact 50 million youth (15–35 
years of age) by 2025. The Strategy aims to achieve 
this through three strategic levers: (i) Integration (equip 
the Bank and Regional Member Countries (RMCs) to 
address youth employment); (ii)  Innovation (working 
with private and public sector partners to incubate, 
implement and scale up promising ideas for creating 
youth employment); and (iii)  Investment (catalyzing 
private and public sector resources to fuel job creation 
for youth). The Bank estimated that implementation 
of the JfYA Strategy would cost UA  4.1  billion. This 
included the mobilization and establishment of a 
UA  3.5  billion Jobs for Youth in Africa Special Fund 
and using other funding resources to achieve the 
objectives of the JfYA Strategy. 
Evaluation purpose and scope: The purpose of 
the mid-term evaluation is to inform the remaining 
implementation period of the Strategy by assessing 
the progress made so far, identifying lessons, and 
recommending improvements and adjustments. The 
evaluation focused on the following questions:
 ❙ How well has the JfYA Strategy positioned the 
Bank to contribute to improving employment 
outcomes of youth in Africa? 
 ❙ Is the implementation of the JfYA Strategy 
contributing to improvements in youth employment 
in RMCs? 
 ❙ Are JfYA Strategy results sustainable or likely to 
be sustained? 
 ❙ What are we learning about what works and does 
not work?
The mid-term evaluation covers the period of 
implementation of the Strategy from June 2016 
to December 2021, with a focus on primary youth 
employment projects. 1 It cuts across all sectors of 
the Bank’s support, as the Strategy is intended to be 
a Bank-wide priority. 
Evaluation approach, methodology and 
limitations: The evaluation adopted a theory-based 
approach to establish the continued relevance, 
effectiveness, and potential for sustainability of 
the JfYA Strategy as of December 2021. The 
evaluation collected and triangulated data through a 
combination of quantitative and qualitative methods 
including: (i)  document review of policies and 
strategies, project documents and available research; 
(ii)  key informant interviews reaching Bank staff, 
RMC representatives, project implementation units, 
private sector organizations and youth; (iii) an online 
survey administered to youth participants of selected 
skills and entrepreneurship development programs; 
and (iv) a series of case studies, including country 
case studies, flagship programs and the Youth 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation Multi Donor Trust 
Fund (YEI MDTF). Complementary reviews, including 
a portfolio review, policy and benchmarking review, 
and project review, were conducted to support the 
generation of evidence-based evaluation findings, 
conclusions, lessons, and recommendations.
Limitations: The evaluation encountered the 
following limitations: (i) unavailability and/or variations 
in the quality of both implementation and outcome 
data; (ii) difficulty in reaching a larger cross-section 
of youth due to limitations in social media platforms 
that could be used for online surveys; (iii)  a low 
response rate in the online survey; (iv) the evaluation 
2  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
did not cover the Bank’s jobs-related support to 
RMCs in dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic to 
avoid duplication with IDEV’s evaluation of the 
AfDB’s COVID-19 response that was ongoing in 
parallel, and because this support was not primarily 
focused on youth; and (v) difficulty in attribution of 
outcomes to the JfYA Strategy, given the Bank-wide 
approach to implementation.
Findings
Bank youth employment portfolio: The evaluation 
found that 479 or 49.5% of the 967 projects approved 
during the period June 2016-December 2021 
incorporated youth employment considerations. Out 
of the 479 projects, 176 (36.7%) were categorized 
as primary youth employment projects, amounting to 
UA 5.16 billion, and the remaining 303 (63.3%) were 
in the secondary category, valued at UA 14.19 billion. 
These projects are predominantly public sector 
operations cutting across all sectors, with the 
majority falling within the agriculture (33.8%), social 
(17%), and governance (13.2%) sectors. Most of the 
primary youth employment operations are ongoing 
(67.5 %), with only 11.5% completed at the time of 
this evaluation. 
Relevance and Coherence
The JfYA Strategy was found to be relevant 
for addressing youth employment across the 
African continent. The evaluation found that the 
Strategy and its country projects/programs are 
aligned with RMCs’ development strategies, needs 
and visions, as reflected in their policy documents, 
medium-term plans and strategy papers. 2 Although 
the market-oriented approach that addresses labor 
demand, supply and linkages through its three 
strategic levers of Integration, Innovation, and 
Investment was found to be relevant for addressing 
the needs and opportunities for youth employment in 
Africa, its Theory of Change lacks sufficient detail to 
inform priorities in outcomes and useful measures 
of success. The evaluation also found that, though 
risks to the Strategy were identified, the mitigation 
measures have not been sufficiently implemented, 
posing a threat to achieving Strategy targets. This 
situation has been worsened by the unanticipated 
COVID-19 pandemic that delayed strategy 
implementation and has affected overall economic 
growth and job creation.
In terms of coherence, the evaluation found that 
the JfYA Strategy aligns well with the Bank’s Ten-
Year Strategy (2013–2022) and other strategies, 
as well as RMCs’ youth employment efforts. 
In addition, the evaluation found that the Bank 
has taken a leadership role in donor coordination 
around youth employment in some RMCs and 
mobilized co-funding opportunities. One of the most 
remarkable examples is the feasibility study for the 
Nigeria Investment in Digital and Creative Enterprises 
Program (I-DICE), which was funded by the YEI MDTF, 
leading to the unlocking of funding and co-financing 
opportunities of USD 618 million within the Bank and 
from other donors, the Nigerian Government, and the 
private sector. However, the evaluation found that 
some strategy interventions were not aligned with 
and feasible within the Bank’s systems. One example 
of this was in the provision of computation thinking 
in secondary schools, given that AfDB education 
activities focus on higher education and Technical 
and Vocational Education and Training (TVET).
The JfYA Strategy has provided the Bank with 
quantifiable youth employment targets that 
have served as a basis for dialogue, resource 
mobilization, and communication/ visibility 
around Bank efforts. However, the underlying 
assumptions behind some of these targets are 
not backed by evidence. This has undermined the 
realism of set targets. For example, assumptions 
that the Coding for Employment (CfE) program –
which focuses on training and linking graduates – 
could create 9 million jobs are not backed by 
evidence. Moreover, research has indicated that 
training alone does not create jobs. An overt focus 
on the number of jobs created also masks the 
required attention to the quality of jobs, which is a 
much greater challenge in Africa. Inconsistencies 
in timelines for the achievement of the targets 
3
Executive Summary
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
for high-level indicators complicate planning and 
measurement processes. For example, job creation 
and youth equipped targets are set for 2025 in the 
Strategy’s objectives and for 2030 in its results 
framework. 
Effectiveness 
The evaluation found actual progress towards 
the achievement of Strategy results (outputs 
and outcomes) difficult to establish due to 
significant monitoring and reporting gaps. Of the 
36 JfYA Strategy results measurement framework 
(RMF) indicators considered for this assessment, 
only 36% (13/36) have up-to-date information. The 
evaluation was unable to establish progress on the 
remaining indicators, due to the lack of reporting 
and/or inconsistencies in existing information. 
A review of corporate data on the results achieved 
regarding the Strategy’s high-level indicators of 
jobs created and youth equipped was inconclusive. 
Existing data from the Development Impact 
and Results Department (SNDR) estimate that 
Bank projects approved between 2016 and 
2021 are expected to create 12,353,080 jobs 
(3,076,881 direct jobs and 9,276,199 indirect and 
induced jobs), which represents a 49% expected 
achievement of the target. However, the direct jobs 
data used for corporate monitoring and reporting of 
the JfYA Strategy is based on ex-ante estimates of 
jobs planned to be created from project appraisal 
reports, rather than data on actual jobs created. 
The evaluation found that although some data on 
actual direct jobs created exists in available project 
completion reports, they are not being used for 
monitoring or reporting on the strategy. In addition, 
both the direct and indirect jobs data are not age-
disaggregated to determine the proportion accruing 
to the youth. The Strategy instead assumes that the 
majority of any jobs created will go to young people, 
since the median age in Africa was 19.5 years at 
the time of Strategy formulation. It is therefore not 
possible for the evaluation to say with certainty how 
far the Strategy has progressed in its aim to create 
25 million jobs by 2025/2030. 
The evaluation did not find consolidated data on 
the number of youth equipped/trained to assess 
progress towards the 50 million “positively impacted” 
target. Such data quality issues pose a high risk of 
not knowing overall outcomes of the Bank’s youth 
employment interventions by the end of the Strategy. 
It is also worth noting that with only 11.5% of primary 
youth employment projects completed during 
the evaluation period, it is too early to adequately 
capture the actual results in terms of jobs created, 
and other outputs and outcomes of these projects, 
and therefore of the Strategy, at this point of its 
implementation.
The evaluation found that implementation 
progress varies across the three levers 
(Integration, Innovation, and Investment) of the 
Strategy. 
Activities aimed at equipping the Bank to better 
integrate youth employment considerations were 
started soon after approval of the Strategy but 
have mostly stalled in recent years. Despite this 
slow progress, Integration of youth employment 
considerations into projects and operations across 
the Bank is occurring, as demonstrated by the large 
volume of primary and secondary projects (i.e., 
84% of the 479 youth employment projects) under 
the management of other departments outside 
the Human Capital, Youth and Skills Development 
Department (AHHD) that houses the Jobs team. 
However, the evaluation found that a lack of 
systemic integration is manifested in the form of 
lost opportunities for addressing youth employment 
issues, and difficulty in standardizing monitoring 
and measurement of youth employment outcomes 
across the entire Bank portfolio. On a positive 
note, ongoing work on the development of a Jobs 
and Skills Marker System (JSMS) to maximize the 
employment impact of Bank investments through 
better integration of jobs considerations into 
projects, standardized results measurement, and 
improved portfolio management is expected to 
improve the quality and scale of implementation 
and measurement of youth employment outcomes 
across the Bank. 
4  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
Interventions to strengthen RMC capacity to address 
youth employment through greater integration in 
country/regional integration strategy papers (CSP/
RISPs), Program Based Operations (PBOs), Institutional 
Support Programs (ISPs) and policy dialogue are also 
ongoing, but results are not yet readily evident. For 
example, while 70% of sampled CSPs drafted after 
the JfYA Strategy’s approval include some mention of 
it, only 43% of them translated this into a dedicated 
youth employment indicator. Similarly, all the five RISPs 
include intentions of furthering youth employment, but 
this is translated into an indicator in only one of them. 
One of the most significant contributions of the Jobs 
team was in the design of the COVID-19 Response 
Facility, bringing in the focus on the protection of 
enterprises and jobs as part of the strengthening 
economic resilience and recovery component.
Activities under the Innovation lever are ongoing 
but at a lower scale and pace than anticipated, 
thereby delaying the likelihood of the achievement 
of the desired results within the Strategy timeframe. 
Specifically, the adoption of flagship program models, 
the projects of which were anticipated to contribute 
over 88% of the job creation targets, is ongoing but 
not yet implemented at the scale required to deliver 
intended results. The aggregated performance of 
projects under each flagship program shows less 
than 50% of achievement of intended training, 
enterprise development, and job creation targets. 
Assumptions behind some of the targets were 
not found to be backed by evidence, reducing the 
likelihood of achievement. The COVID-19 pandemic 
also affected the timely roll-out and subsequent 
demand for flagship programs. Experience during 
the first five years of Strategy implementation has 
shown that RMCs prefer integrated and customized 
solutions that address multiple constraints to job 
creation and productivity over the predesigned 
flagship stand-alone program models. Though the 
Bank has now established the Innovation Lab, it 
is not yet positioned to be the youth employment 
knowledge generation and learning hub that will 
inform the scale-up of workable solutions within 
the Bank and across to other development partners, 
as intended. The Enabling Youth Employment 
Dashboard was developed but is yet to be made 
available for use in policy dialogue.
Though only half of the planned activities under the 
Investment lever are ongoing, they are generating 
necessary finance and stimulating private sector 
investment. However, the extent of reach and impact 
of these interventions on the youth is unknown. For 
example, the Bank has increased equity in the Africa 
Guarantee Fund (AGF) in accordance with planned 
levels towards reducing risks of lending to small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs). Despite COVID-19-related 
delays, the evaluation found that equity investments 
in venture capital funds through the Boost Africa 
Investment Program are on track to increase access 
to capital for young entrepreneurs. However, the 
evaluation found that the intended use of lines of credit 
(LoCs) through the Africa Small and Micro-Enterprise 
program for on-lending to youth-led organizations has 
not materialized as the program continues to lend to 
SMEs broadly. Despite the lack of youth focus in the 
investment activities, they are expected to benefit 
given their dominance in the labor force. The Bank is 
currently designing Youth Entrepreneurship Investment 
Banks (YEIBs) to address issues of access to finance 
and coordination of enterprise support services from the 
Bank. During the evaluation period, the Bank provided 
mentoring and coaching to young entrepreneurs 
through four prize challenges events that saw cash 
prizes awarded to 110 youth to grow their businesses 
and networks. However, the evaluation found that the 
current application of the prize challenges is not aligned 
with incentivizing market-based solutions to youth 
employment barriers as envisaged in the Strategy. 
For example, the 2020 AgriPitch Competition required 
participants to demonstrate sustainable malnutrition 
and gender inclusiveness in the agribusiness value 
chain but was not necessarily focused on addressing a 
specific youth employment barrier.
Adequacy of resources and systems to 
support implementation 
The Bank has mobilized significant levels of funding 
for youth employment operations, exceeding the 
estimated requirement of UA 4.1 billion. This 
5
Executive Summary
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
is evidenced by the UA 5.16 billion invested in 
primary youth employment projects and more than 
UA 2.8 billion mobilized in co-financing from external 
partners. However, the Bank did not establish the 
UA 3.5 billion JfYA Facility (Special Fund), which was 
expected to contribute 85% of the required funding 
for Strategy implementation. The evaluation found 
that overly optimistic expectations may have affected 
the non-realization of this Facility. Instead, the Bank 
mobilized resources from development partners to 
set up the USD 38.9 million YEI  MDTF, which has 
facilitated the catalytic and innovative activities that 
are unlocking significant employment potentials. 
However, the absence of dedicated funding from 
the Facility has hindered implementation of core 
components of the Strategy. These include staff 
and RMC capacity-building activities, support for 
appraisal and supervision activities, facilitation of the 
Innovation Lab, and support for implementation of 
flagship activities at scale.
The evaluation found that modifications to the 
staffing structure and numbers have had mixed 
effects on the adequacy of human resources to 
coordinate the implementation of the Strategy. 
At the time of the evaluation, six of the original 
18 positions were still vacant. Despite this, the current 
Jobs team has played a critical role in different phases 
of the design and management of youth employment 
projects. However, changes in staff functions and 
unfilled positions have affected the delivery of some 
critical tasks, with downstream implications on the 
Bank’s ability to implement the strategy at scale and 
achieve sustainability. Specifically, these staffing 
shortfalls have undermined progress on developing 
required RMC capacity, the generation of knowledge 
on innovative scalable ideas, and the provision of 
adequate financing for youth-led enterprises to grow 
their businesses. 
Though efforts were made to integrate youth 
considerations into the Bank’s monitoring and 
evaluation systems, the evaluation found these 
inadequate for strategy management and 
continuous learning. One remarkable achievement 
in results measurement was the development and 
roll-out of the Joint Impact Model, a mechanism 
for estimating indirect jobs. At the same time, the 
evaluation found that, while AHHD is considered 
the sector lead on the Strategy, it does not have the 
authority, tools, and/or human resources to hold other 
departments to account for JfYA Strategy indicators 
they lead on and/or contribute to. Efforts are ongoing 
to improve the measurement of employment 
outcomes across the Bank portfolio, including the 
development and roll-out of the JSMS, standard 
indicators, and other monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E)  enhancements. 
Sustainability
The evaluation found that the JfYA Strategy’s design 
and ongoing interventions demonstrate a strong 
likelihood of sustainability, given the attention to 
building institutional capacity and an enabling 
environment, and developing entrepreneurship 
and strategic partnerships for addressing youth 
employment concerns. However, the most significant 
risks to sustainability are related to inadequate 
implementation of key elements of the Strategy 
that could affect the achievement of the required 
institutional capacity, inadequate focus on youth 
beneficiaries, limited interventions to address access 
to finance for youth enterprises, and exogenous 
factors that affect overall macroeconomic stability 
and resilience.
Lessons
1. Over-optimistic expectations around 
fundamental elements of a strategy, such 
as dedicated financing through a Special 
Fund, human resource allocation, and the 
establishment of the required systems, can 
undermine progress. While the JfYA Strategy 
strived to be innovative, ambitious, and to 
implement at scale, initiatives that require new 
operational structures and systems, expertise 
and skills, and additional resources, require more 
feasibility analysis, upfront commitment, and 
attention to risk mitigation. While the evaluation 
6  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
found several examples of Bank adaptations to 
some of these shortcomings, risk mitigation and 
surveillance should have been stronger to signal 
the required Management action. A thorough 
analysis of the Strategy’s feasibility and its 
key interventions, ensuring alignment with the 
Bank policies and procedures, securing upfront 
commitments, risk surveillance, and continuous 
monitoring of innovative elements are essential 
to strategy design and management processes.
2. Governance structures supported by 
appropriate management tools, resources, 
and authority are essential for systematic 
coordination and oversight of Bank-
wide strategies, such as that of the JfYA 
Strategy. Such a structure is critical for the 
implementation of a cross-cutting strategy to 
review progress, mobilize joint action to address 
bottlenecks, and leverage opportunities and 
synergies. While the Jobs team is expected to 
oversee and coordinate JfYA Strategy activities 
implemented across different departments, the 
evaluation found that it does not have the tools, 
platforms, resources, and authority to effectively 
do this. The Bank’s department-led planning, 
budgeting, and monitoring systems were found 
to be insufficient to enable ongoing coordination, 
resource mobilization, and reporting. 
3. The right incentives paired with 
accountability mechanisms can strongly 
advance successful integration of 
employment considerations across the 
Bank. Effective integration of youth employment 
(or broad employment) within the Bank would 
mean that programs across the Bank consider 
and adequately leverage and integrate 
opportunities for youth employment from the 
onset. The integration of youth employment 
in the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD) was reported to be more 
successful when combined with incentives and 
accountability structures within the institution. 
Within the AfDB, the gender marker system has 
enabled better integration of gender across the 
Bank. In addition, tracking gender and climate 
change integration indicators in the Bank’s RMF, 
corporate key performance indicators (KPIs), 
and the delivery dashboard raise the profile and 
accountability across different complexes.
4. Skills development, when coupled with 
access to finance and non-financial support, 
is key to boosting employability and youth 
entrepreneurship. Skills development is 
essential, but in itself it is insufficient to create 
jobs. It is therefore important to be realistic about 
job outcomes from training and skills development 
activities. Firm creation and expansion create 
jobs, and this is where the more intense focus 
on jobs targets and monitoring can be directed.
5. Small-size grants can be effective in unlocking 
catalytic opportunities. In the case of the JfYA 
Strategy, the evaluation found that what has 
worked well is the shift towards catalytic efforts 
to unlock funding and support the achievement 
of the broader Strategy goals. Specifically, the 
Bank leveraged the USD 38.9 million YEI MDTF 
funding to conduct feasibility and research 
studies of catalytic initiatives and financing of 
other innovative activities that otherwise might 
not have been funded. 
Recommendations
IDEV makes the following recommendations: 
1. Update the Strategy and its implementation 
plan based on current circumstances and 
resources. Bank Management is specifically 
advised to:
 ■ Update the Theory of Change, the Implementation 
Plan, and the targets for the remaining period 
of the Strategy, based on the findings from the 
mid-term evaluation, current realities (including 
Bank systems, the new AfDB Ten-Year Strategy 
under development, country specificities, and 
changes in the macroeconomic environment), 
7
Executive Summary
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
and available resources. 
 ■ Review and update the risk mitigation 
measures and surveillance plans to guide 
necessary adjustments to the Strategy and the 
Implementation Plan.
2. Strengthen Results Measurement and 
Learning. The Bank is advised to:
 ■ Advance implementation of the Jobs and 
Skills Marker System along with the necessary 
resources, technical assistance, and staff 
training to improve the quality, implementation, 
and measurement of youth employment 
outcomes across the Bank. 
 ■ Improve the quality and consistency of data 
measuring actually created jobs for youth 
across the Bank’s operations, and enhancing 
its ability to better demonstrate the results of 
the JfYA Strategy. 
 ■ Consider adopting a jobs indicator among 
the Bank’s KPIs to provide incentives and 
accountability for job creation, shared across 
Bank departments.
 ■ Review the JfYA Strategy’s RMF, including 
considering reducing the existing number of 
indicators for delivering youth employment 
across the Bank, with a focus on relevance, 
feasibility, and utility. The framework should 
be accompanied by clear indicator definitions, 
measurement approaches, annual targets, 
clear roles and responsibilities, reporting 
procedures, and resource requirements to 
support data availability. The framework 
could also consider indicators of job quality 
and decent work, in line with building more 
resilient employment. 
 ■ Capacitate the Innovation Lab to take on its 
intended core role of generating evidence on 
and becoming the Bank’s center of excellence 
on youth employment and entrepreneurship, 
with a view to coordinating learning and 
knowledge exchange, working hand in 
hand with regional offices, research, and 
other departments in the Bank, and other 
development partners.
3. Continue to mobilize resources to support 
catalytic activities and high employment-
creating projects. 
The Bank is advised to expand the scale and 
scope of the YEI MDTF, in line with the new Trust 
Fund Policy 2021, to continue its catalytic work 
including feasibility studies, research and project 
assessments, and seed financing for innovative 
activities that will unlock funds for job creation 
at scale.
4. Strengthen leadership and coordination of 
youth employment across Bank departments, 
building on existing resources and 
considering other Bank priorities. 
This can include reviewing the structure, 
positioning, functions, and resourcing of the JfYA 
team to provide leadership in the area of youth 
employment across the Bank. 

9
Management Response
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Management Response
Management welcomes the outcomes of the Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa 
(JfYA) Strategy 2016-2025,3 by the Independent Development Evaluation (IDEV) department, covering 
the period June 2016 – December 2021. Job creation is central to the Bank’s mission of spurring 
sustainable economic development and social progress in Regional Member Countries (RMCs). 
Management accepts the evaluation findings and takes note that the JfYA Strategy was found to be 
relevant for addressing youth employment across the African continent. Management also welcomes 
the recommendation to strengthen strategy execution and progress measurement, in line with the 
Bank’s new Ten-Year Strategy  (TYS) 2024-2033 and corporate results measurement framework. 
Management commits to fully implement the evaluation learnings and recommendations, embracing 
it as an opportunity to sharpen the execution of the Strategy in the remaining period. This will 
facilitate accelerated and effective delivery of the JfYA Strategy, as the Bank strives to achieve 
greater development impact particularly on youth employment.
Introduction and context
The IDEV mid-term evaluation of the JfYA Strategy 
comes at a time when there are significant 
developments in Africa’s labour market. Youth 
unemployment, underemployment, and idleness 
have worsened due to several factors including 
high youth labour force growth, continued jobless 
economic growth coupled with the impact of 
global headwinds and emerging downside risks 
from the COVID-19 pandemic, climate change and 
geopolitical and food crises. 
The International Labour Organization (ILO) Africa’s 
labour market outlook for 2023 foresees a modest 
increase in the unemployment rate from 6.5% in 
2019 to 7.1% in 2023 4 but with a jobs gap rate 5 
estimated at 21.3% against the global average of 
12.3%. A large share of young people remain 
outside employment and youth inactivity has 
remained high, as reflected by the number of young 
people Not in Education, Employment, or Training 
(NEET) rate of 26.1% in 2022. Even with employment, 
31% are in extreme working poverty conditions, 
exhibiting challenges of high informality (85%) which 
characterize the region’s labour market.6 
The JfYA Strategy notes that the consequences of 
youth unemployment in Africa are pervasive and 
severe: unemployment translates to poorer living 
conditions, fuels migration within and out of Africa, 
and contributes to criminality, conflict, and insecurity 
on the continent itself. The high share of unemployed 
and unproductive youth further weakens African 
economies through the lost opportunity in growing 
fiscal tax revenues while increasing demand for the 
governments’ social welfare support systems.
In May 2016, the Bank responded to youth 
unemployment by launching its Bank-wide Jobs 
for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016-2025, during 
its Annual Meetings in Lusaka, Zambia, with an 
emphasis on urgently promoting inclusive socio-
economic transformation and jobs-induced growth, 
to improve the quality of life for all Africans. JfYA 
Strategy aims to create twenty-five million jobs, and 
positively impact fifty million youth, by promoting 
job creating economic growth, strengthened human 
capital and entrepreneurship, and durable labour 
market linkages. The Strategy’s desired long-term 
outcome is expanded economic opportunity and 
increased labour force participation for both male 
and female African youth.
10  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
Institutional commitment to the JfYA Strategy 
continued through the General Capital Increase 
(GCI)-7 and Africa Development Fund (ADF) 
commitments, the Bank’s TYS, and harmonization 
with other sector policies such as the Private 
Sector Development Policy. The implementation 
plan approved together with the JfYA Strategy 
prescribed a phased implementation approach, 
aimed at ensuring that systems and resources 
would be established by the fourth quarter of 2016 
for implementation of activities in 2017. 
However, actual implementation only started in 
2018, two years after Board approval when the 
jobs team was recruited.  However, the team was 
not provided an operational budget nor a cost centre 
to support Strategy implementation. The identified 
implementation risks of (1)  insufficient funding to 
support the scale of ambition in youth employment 
outcomes, and (2)  competition with other Bank 
priorities7 also materialized. The Bank estimated 
that implementation of the JfYA Strategy would 
cost UA  4.1  billion. This included the mobilization 
and establishment of a UA 3.5 billion Jobs for Youth 
in Africa Special Fund and using other funding 
resources to achieve the objectives of the JfYA 
Strategy. 
The retrogressive COVID-19 pandemic also led 
the Bank to reprioritize its allocation of resources 
with the establishment of the COVID-19 Rapid 
Response Facility in 2020 to mitigate the impact 
of the pandemic on RMCs. While some COVID-19 
operations were also designed to impact 
employment, the resultant number of jobs saved, 
and job quality improved, are not part of the result 
indicators of the JfYA Strategy as approved and 
are therefore not captured in this evaluation. As 
a result, the Strategy’s first half implementation 
period was reduced by two years, the focus shifted 
to saving lives, enterprises, and jobs.
Despite these challenges, the Bank continued to 
make progress in implementing the JfYA Strategy 
primarily through its Integration lever. Through 
integration, the Bank set out to leverage sovereign 
and non-sovereign financing instruments, make 
strategic use of trust funds and transition state 
facilities, build synergies and strengthen financial 
and technical partnerships to achieve scale, impact, 
and sustainability of the Strategy. 
For the evaluation period 2016-2021, Bank 
investment operations approved by the Board were 
expected to create 12.4  million jobs, of which 
3.1 million were direct and 9.3 million indirect. As 
of December 2022, the figure of expected jobs had 
risen to 14.6 million, of which 4.2 million were direct 
and 10.4  million indirect. The rise was attributed 
to an increase in the high impact operations and 
special initiatives that targeted job-rich, women and 
youth-friendly sectors such as agriculture, digital, 
and creative sectors. 
Management notes that the evaluation did not 
consider these expected jobs (ex-ante) as they 
are viewed not as ‘actual results’ for several 
reasons including project cancellations and other 
implementation challenges. Ex-ante data however 
functions as an implementation yardstick to predict 
the chances of achieving the Strategy targets. 
The evaluation computed actual results from 
Project Completion Reports (PCRs) and Expanded 
Supervision Reports (XSRs). Since the evaluation 
focused on the period up to 2021 and considering 
that the JfYA project portfolio is less than 5 years, 
Management notes that actual results are still 
emerging. 
Relevance 
Management is encouraged to note the evaluation’s 
reaffirmation of the Strategy’s continued relevance 
for addressing youth employment in Africa, along 
with its continued alignment and coherence with 
RMCs’ policy documents, medium-term plans, and 
strategy papers. 
Management also welcomes the specific findings 
that highlight areas of the Strategy that require 
improvement, given the shifting economic growth 
11
Management Response
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
landscape and recurrent risks. For instance, they call 
for greater emphasis in addressing insecurity and 
fragility aspects in the context of job creation, given 
their impact on youth trapped in such conditions. 
Furthermore, the JfYA Strategy’s Theory of Change 
is iterative and must adapt to rapidly evolving 
internal and external contexts and draw on lessons 
learnt over the first implementation phase. These, in 
turn, support improvement of the Strategy’s results 
indicators and targets, linked to a practical monitoring 
and evaluation system for results reporting. 
Management also acknowledges the evaluation 
finding that the adoption of the JfYA Strategy 
has advanced youth employment advocacy 
through its integration in Country Strategy Papers 
(CSPs),8 contributing to the enhanced alignment 
of Bank assistance with country needs. However, 
management notes the evaluation finding that 
while 70% of CSPs drafted after the JfYA Strategy 
specifically referenced the analysis, only 43% of 
CSPs have translated this into youth employment 
operations. Management will strengthen evidence-
based policy dialogue to accelerate the preparation 
of job-focused CSPs and operations. It will 
institutionalize job creation as a corporate key 
performance indicator to accelerate the strategy 
implementation and achievement of results.
Management also takes note of the evaluation 
finding on gaps in the JfYA Strategy implementation 
results tracking. The need for clarity on jobs that 
accrue to youth, measurement systems that ensure 
that jobs data are disaggregated by age, as well as 
the quality of jobs supported by Bank investment 
operations in RMCs. Management is aware that the 
Bank’s project life cycle currently lacks systematic 
and standardized guidance on the integration of 
employment considerations. This leads to lost 
opportunities for maximizing job creation outcomes, 
particularly for youth. Other organizations have 
also reported similar challenges in addressing 
the complexity of measuring and evaluating job 
creation. Management will continue to work together 
with other Development Finance and Technical 
Assistance Institutions to improve the Bank’s results 
measurement system on jobs.
In this regard, the Operations Committee in 
November 2022 endorsed the Bank’s Jobs and Skills 
Marker System (JSMS) which is being developed 
in partnership with the International Labour 
Organization. The JSMS will provide a structured and 
standardized approach to maximize employment 
outcomes of the Bank’s sovereign and non-sovereign 
investment operations in RMCs. With its integration 
into Bank systems and processes, the JSMS will 
provide a ‘jobs lense’ and contribute to enhancing 
quality assurance of investment operations and 
corporate results measurement, monitoring, and 
data reporting on job creation.  
Coherence
Management welcomes the evaluation’s findings 
on the internal and external coherence of the JfYA 
Strategy and its inclusion in the Bank and its cross-
cutting sectoral strategies. The Strategy’s external 
coherence and complementarity with other external 
stakeholders enables the Bank to use its financing 
instruments and convening power to leverage 
Box 1: The Bank’s Jobs and Skills Marker System
The ILO situation analysis found the JSMS to be the first of its kind among International Finance Institutions (IFIs). 
The JSMS seeks to increase institutional emphasis on youth employment as a cross-cutting theme. It complements 
ongoing Bank actions such as the Joint Impact Model that measure indirect jobs and induced effects, the Additionality 
of Development Outcome Assessment (ADOA) Framework recently updated to 3.0, the Enhanced Readiness Review, 
and builds on the successful Gender Marker System.
The JSMS framework adopts a ‘jobs lens’ in terms of (i) job quantity to measure the total number of jobs supported 
or created; (ii) job quality9 ; and (iii) job inclusion to determine how Bank projects facilitate employment opportunities 
for youth and women. 
12  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
additional investment financing and wider efforts 
toward job-centric investments in RMCs. 
Management also acknowledges the need for 
improvements to the Strategy to enhance its increased 
coherence with current Bank procedures, systems, 
and frameworks to ensure effective execution of 
its interventions. Management will ensure that the 
updates to the JfYA will be in alignment with the 
new TYS and results measurement framework (RMF) 
once approved by the Bank’s Board of Directors.
Effectiveness 
Sharpening the focus on results and development 
impact is a corporate priority. Hence, Management 
welcomes the evaluation’s finding on the need to 
address monitoring and reporting gaps to determine 
actual progress against targeted strategy results.
Management acknowledges the need to revise 
the Strategy’s Results Framework to ensure it 
is realistic and achievable. The evaluation found 
that of the forty indicators proposed by the 
Strategy, 42% were not directly relevant and 
useful for tracking outcomes. An update of the 
JfYA will be an opportunity to refine the results 
framework with more SMART and manageable set 
of indicators, commensurate with the Bank’s level 
of ambition, data tracking and reporting systems 
and consistent with the Corporate Results 
Measurement Framework, and the new TYS. 
Management will further revise the Strategy’s 
Theory of Change. 
The Bank’s progressive efforts on job measurement 
and reporting following the JfYA Strategy adoption, 
are also noteworthy. In 2016, the Bank developed 
its corporate Results Measurement Framework 
(2016-2025) to better position the Bank to report 
on progress on the High 5s Agenda. This effort 
integrated indicators on direct and indirect jobs 
supported by Bank investment operations and 
subsequently started being reported in the Annual 
Development Effectiveness Review (ADER). 
Continuous improvement of the Bank’s jobs 
measurement has culminated in the Joint Impact 
Model (JIM) used to estimate indirect jobs 
generated by Bank operations, as well as the 
value added by these jobs to African economies. 
The JIM, being developed through a growing 
partnership now encompassing ten Development 
Finance Institutions 10, commenced in 2019, 
to jointly work towards harmonization of job 
measurement practice. 
Ongoing improvements in the JIM will enable the 
Bank to further disaggregate indirect job data by age, 
like the current practice of sex-disaggregated data 
and its application at the project level to estimate 
indirect jobs. 
The JSMS will provide a system to enhance the 
credibility of the jobs data through harmonized, 
standardized, and consistent indicators and data 
disaggregation reporting. It includes systematic 
guidance, capacity building, and tools provided 
across operational sectors to increase the quality of 
data on direct jobs. 
Overall, the Bank aims to focus on improvements 
in development impact data. In Q4 of 2022, it 
began revising its RMF including the development 
and integration of standard indicators to improve 
inter-alia, alignment, and reporting on cross-
cutting employment indicators. Earlier in 2021, 
the Bank introduced a Results Reporting System 
that automates and digitizes investment operations 
results reporting by Task Managers in real-time. 
In terms of the evaluation’s findings on staff 
capacity building, as part of the JSMS workstream, 
in partnership with the ILO’s International Training 
Center, the Bank is developing tailored, self-guided 
online training modules that could potentially be 
integrated into the Bank’s Operations Academy 
to strengthen the mainstreaming of jobs in Bank 
investment operations.
On the Strategy’s Innovation lever, Management 
notes the evaluation findings that recommend 
13
Management Response
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
strengthening evidence to better inform flagship 
programs. They further recommend increasing the 
Innovation Lab 11 research activities to accelerate 
the development of innovative ideas, employment, 
and entrepreneurship. In this context, the Bank has 
developed the ENNOVA online platform that provides 
access to knowledge and supports capacity building 
for African Entrepreneurship Support Organization 
and micro, small and medium, enterprises (MSMEs). 
ENNOVA responds to capacity gaps by serving as 
a resource that enables Bank-relevant operations’ 
experts working on entrepreneurship to learn how 
to deepen the impact of investment operations on 
youth employment and MSME development. 
In line with the evaluation recommendations to 
implement market-based solutions to address youth 
employment barriers and youth-centric investments, 
Management will continue to strengthen actions 
under the Investment lever by leveraging its 
traditional African Development Bank (ADB), African 
Development Fund and other approved private 
sector vehicles to advance youth employment. In 
this regard, the Youth Entrepreneurship Investment 
Banks (YEIB) flagship program that addresses 
market failures and fragmentation in financing and 
non-financing services for youth entrepreneurs 
in Africa in a systemic, scalable, and sustainable 
manner holds enormous potential for accelerating 
job creation. 
The UA 12 million Liberia YEIB, the first to be 
approved by the Bank’s Board of Directors in 
July 2023 provides an example in this respect. 
The project aims to establish a youth-focused 
(15-35 years) institution to unlock finance, market 
access, and development services to target 
youth-led businesses. The thematic lines of credit 
targeting MSMEs that offer jobs in economic value 
chains where youth are active could enhance youth 
outreach and inclusion. 
Management is cognizant of JfYA Strategy challenges 
related to financing, staffing and governance 
systems as highlighted by the evaluation. The Bank 
recognizes that structural changes require careful 
consideration, and that multiple mechanisms and 
options are available to address the challenge. 
Management will, therefore, consider optimal actions 
for strengthening the Jobs Team’s effectiveness 
and delivery of Strategy commitments along with 
necessary resources. This will be presented together 
with the strategy update and acceleration plan.
Sustainability
Management is pleased with the evaluation finding of 
high likelihood of sustainability of JfYA Strategy results. 
Management also notes, however, the findings related 
to implementation gaps requiring increased attention to 
institutional capacity, focus on youth beneficiaries, and 
exogenous factors that affect overall macroeconomic 
stability and resilience. As noted under Relevance, the 
JSMS provides a strong opportunity to maximize youth 
employment considerations as a modus operandi 
for investment operations and further strengthen 
sustainability elements. 
Lessons
Management welcomes the evaluation lessons. 
The five identified lessons will contribute to the 
successful implementation of the final phase of the 
Strategy. The Bank is confident of its catalytic role 
to scale development impact for youth employment 
in RMCs by leveraging its comparative advantages 
in financing, evidence-based policy dialogue and 
convening power. 
Management nevertheless recognizes the need to 
ensure that interventions are realistic and that desired 
outcomes are achievable, and more importantly they 
are aligned to the systems and resources that affect 
the Banks’s ability to implement. A more selective 
and structured approach is planned to follow the 
approval of TYS 2.0. Management is committed 
to the specific actions outlined in the subsequent 
section of this document. 
14  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
Management Action Record
Recommendation Management Response
Recommendation 1: Update the Strategy and its implementation plan based on current circumstances and 
resources.
Bank Management is specifically advised 
to:
i. Update the Theory of Change, the 
Implementation Plan, and the targets 
for the remaining period of the Strategy, 
based on the findings from the mid-
term evaluation, current realities 
(including Bank systems, the new AfDB 
Ten-Year Strategy under development, 
country specificities, and changes in 
the macroeconomic environment), and 
available resources
ii. Review and update the risk mitigation 
measures and surveillance plans to guide 
necessary adjustments to the Strategy 
and the Implementation Plan.
AGREED
Actions:
1. The JfYA strategy expires in 2025, and thus have only two years to 
improve performance, the Bank will review the theory of change, 
indicators, and targets, in line with the RMF, in consultation with RMCs, 
and drawing from the evaluation lessons and good practices over the 
first implementation phase. These revisions will be captured in the 
Revised Strategy Implementation Plan 2024 – 2025 to be approved by 
OpsCOm by 31 March 2024. 
2. Following a final evaluation of the JfYA Strategy, the Bank will develop a 
Jobs for Youth in Africa Action Plan 2026 – 2032 aligned to the Bank’s 
New Ten-Year Strategy to be approved by 31 December 2025. AHHD 
will lead the One Bank team in collaboration with the SNSP .
Recommendation 2: Strengthen Results Measurement and Learning.
The Bank is advised to: 
i. Advance implementation of the Jobs 
and Skills Marker System (JSMS) 
along with the necessary resources, 
technical assistance, and staff training 
to improve the quality, implementation, 
and measurement of youth employment 
outcomes across the Bank. 
ii. Improve the quality and consistency of 
data measuring created jobs for youth 
across the Bank’s operations and enhance 
its ability to better demonstrate the results 
of the JfYA Strategy. 
iii. Consider adopting a jobs indicator among 
the Bank’s KPIs to provide incentives and 
accountability for job creation, shared 
across Bank departments.
AGREED
Actions:
Sub-Recommendations (i) and (ii)
3. Management is preparing the Jobs and Skills Marker System 
incorporating best practices and learnings benchmarked with other 
DFIs/IFIs. The JSMS implementation framework will be aligned to the 
TYS RMF Standard Sector indicators for quality and consistency of data. 
The JSMS will be presented to OpsCom for approval by June 2024.
AHHD will lead, in collaboration with the PIVP , PEVP , RDVP , SNDR, ECMR, 
PECG, and TCVP .
Sub-Recommendation (iii)
4. Management will introduce a jobs indicator in the Bank Institutional KPIs, 
specifically under corporate commitments by 31 December 2025.
AHHD/AHVP will lead in coordination with the SNVP , SNPB, RDVP , PIVP , 
and PEVP .
15
Management Response
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Management Action Record
Recommendation Management Response
iv. Review the JfYA Strategy’s RMF, including 
considering reducing the existing number of 
indicators for delivering youth employment 
across the Bank, with a focus on relevance, 
feasibility, and utility. The framework should 
be accompanied by clear indicator definitions, 
measurement approaches, annual targets, 
clear roles, and responsibilities, reporting 
procedures, and resource requirements 
to support data availability. The framework 
could also consider indicators of job quality 
and decent work, in line with building more 
resilient employment.
v. Capacitate the Innovation Lab to take on its 
intended core role of generating evidence on 
and becoming the Bank’s center of excellence 
on youth employment, and entrepreneurship 
with a view to coordinating learning and 
knowledge exchange, working hand in 
hand with regional offices, research, and 
other departments in the Bank, and other 
development partners.
Sub-Recommendation (iv)
5. The Bank will review the JfYA Results Measurement Framework 
in line with the Results Measurement Framework, and the Bank’s 
Standard Sector Indicators currently under revision.  This will 
commence after the approval of the Ten-Year Strategy by the Board, 
which is expected by December 2023, and will be included in the 
Jobs for Youth in Africa Action Plan 2026 – 2032 by 31 December 
2025.
AHHD will lead in coordination with the SNDR and SNSP .
Sub-Recommendation (v)
6. The Bank will strengthen the Innovation Lab as a knowledge repository 
and centre of excellence for youth employment and entrepreneurship 
in line with the JfYA strategy commitment. The Bank will further 
reinforce ENNOVA as a networking and knowledge repository to 
promote youth entrepreneurship in Africa. The ENNOVA Platform will 
be operational by December 2024. 
Recommendation 3: Continue to mobilize resources to support catalytic activities and high employment-creating projects.
The Bank is advised to expand the scale 
and scope of the YEI MDTF, in line with the 
new Trust Fund Policy 2021, to continue its 
catalytic work including feasibility studies, 
research and project assessments, and 
seed financing for innovative activities 
that will unlock funds for implementing job 
creation at scale.
AGREED 
7. The main instrument for financing the JfYA strategy interventions over the 
remaining period will continue to be through the Bank’s traditional ADB 
and ADF financing instruments which present opportunities to leverage 
co-financing to scale up results. The Bank, in close consultation with its 
donor partners, will also explore opportunities for expanding the scope of 
the YEI MDTF financing instruments to mobilize additional resources in 
line with the Bank’s new Trust Fund Policy by December 2024.  
AHHD will lead in collaboration with the FIRM and PGCL.
Recommendation 4: Strengthen leadership and coordination of youth employment across Bank departments, building 
on existing resources and considering other Bank priorities.
This can include reviewing the structure, 
positioning, functions, and resourcing of the 
JfYA team to provide leadership in the area of 
youth employment across the Bank.
AGREED 
Actions:
8. In line with the strategic staffing and budget, the Bank will review the staffing 
of the Jobs Team, its positioning, functions, and resourcing. Appropriate 
adjustments will be made with the aim of ensuring effective delivery of the 
strategy commitments. This is expected to be achieved by 31 December 
2025 and it will be included as part of the new Jobs for Youth Action Plan 
2026 - 2032. In the meantime, management will consider the creation of 
a cost center for the Jobs Team to facilitate expedited implementation of 
the final phase of the Strategy and the preparation of the JfYA Action Plan. 
AHHD will lead and be supported by SNPB and PTCE.

17
Introduction
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Introduction
This evaluation report summarizes the key 
findings, lessons, and recommendations of the 
mid-term evaluation of the African Development 
Bank Group’s (AfDB or “the Bank”) Jobs for Youth 
in Africa Strategy (2016–2025). The Strategy 
was approved with the aim of creating 25 million 
jobs and positively impacting 50 million youth (15–
35 years of age) by 2025. This Strategy directly 
contributes to the AfDB’s Ten-Year Strategy 
(TYS) objective of achieving inclusive growth 
by expanding economic opportunities for all 
irrespective of gender, age, socioeconomic strata, 
and geography.
The first section of this report briefly presents 
the evaluation’s purpose, scope, methodological 
approach, and limitations. The next section 
discusses the youth employment context in 
Africa, followed by the section which reviews 
the Bank’s Jobs for Youth in Africa (JfYA) 
Strategy and portfolio. Followed by the section 
on evaluation findings regarding relevance, 
coherence, effectiveness, adequacy of resources 
and systems, and sustainability. The last section 
distils a set of conclusions, lessons, and forward-
oriented recommendations.
Evaluation Purpose, Objectives, 
and Scope
The Bank’s Independent Development Evaluation 
(IDEV) has conducted a mid-term evaluation (MTE) 
of the JfYA Strategy as part of its 2019–2021 
Work Program approved by the Bank’s Board of 
Directors. The purpose of the MTE is to inform the 
remaining implementation period of the Strategy 
by assessing the progress made so far, identifying 
lessons, and recommending improvements and 
adjustments. 
The specific objectives of the evaluation are to:
 ❙ Assess the continued relevance and validity of 
the Theory of Change and planning assumptions 
underpinning the Strategy, given contextual 
changes and shifts over the past five years;
 ❙ Assess the coherence, effectiveness, efficiency, 
and sustainability of the results achieved at mid-
term and the likelihood of achieving the intended 
results in the remaining period;
 ❙ Identify enabling and hindering factors to the 
achievement of expected outcomes; and 
 ❙ Draw lessons and provide actionable 
recommendations for areas of improvement, 
mid-course correction, if necessary, and/or new 
opportunities to be explored over the remaining 
course of the Strategy.
The main evaluation questions aligned with the 
international evaluation criteria guiding this exercise 
include:
1. How well has the JfYA Strategy positioned the 
Bank to contribute to improving employment 
outcomes of youth in Africa? (Relevance, 
Coherence, and Efficiency)
2. Is the implementation of the JfYA Strategy 
contributing to improvements in youth 
employment in Regional Member Countries 
(RMCs)? (Effectiveness and Efficiency)
3. Are JfYA Strategy results sustainable or likely to 
be sustained? (Sustainability)
4. What are we learning about what works and does 
not work?
18  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
Specific questions are presented in the evaluation 
matrix according to the international evaluation 
criteria (see Annex 1).
The MTE covers the period of implementation of the 
Strategy from June 2016 to December 2021, with a 
focus on primary youth employment projects. These 
are defined as projects that directly promote youth 
employment and employability, and reflect this in 
their goals, objectives or results. Secondary youth 
employment projects are those that do not define 
youth employment as an objective/result but have 
potential for creating jobs for youth. The evaluation 
cuts across all sectors of the Bank’s support, as the 
Strategy is intended to be a Bank-wide priority. 
Evaluation Approach and Methodology
The evaluation adopted a theory-based approach to 
understanding the continued relevance, effectiveness, 
and potential for sustainability of the JfYA Strategy as of 
December 2021. The evaluation team re-constructed 
a detailed Theory of Change (ToC) to better outline 
the pathways to change and inform the analytical 
framework for purposes of the evaluation exercise 
(see Annex 2).
In order to generate the relevant information needed to 
respond to the evaluation questions, the evaluation used 
both primary and secondary data sources. The exercise 
involved triangulation and analysis of the information 
collected from the different sources to establish the 
evidence. Methods used to collect data included: 
 ❙ Document review of a cross section of strategy 
documents, including country and regional 
integration strategy papers, implementation plans, 
progress reports, leading research on youth 
employment in Africa and similar contexts. The full 
list is contained in the References section.
 ❙ Key informant interviews were held with 
over 205 stakeholders, including Bank staff, 
RMC representatives, partner organizations 
and implementing agencies, other development 
agencies, private sector organizations, and 
stakeholders working in the youth employment 
space in Africa. 
 ❙ Focus group discussions (5) were held with 
youth engaged in different JfYA Strategy activities 
to share their perspectives and opinions on the 
relevance and impact of the youth economic 
empowerment activities. 
 ❙ An online survey was administered to youth 
participants of selected skills and entrepreneurship 
development programs. 
 ❙ Case studies. A series of case studies was 
conducted to enable in-depth investigation of 
different elements of the Strategy across different 
programs and country contexts. The case studies 
included an in-depth review of a total of 104 projects. 
 ■ Country case studies of five countries (Kenya, 
Malawi, Morocco, Democratic Republic 
of Congo (DRC) and Senegal) to provide 
an in-depth analysis and learning on the 
implementation of the Strategy. The countries 
were selected purposively to ensure a regional 
representation, volume of interventions, mix of 
completed/ongoing/approved primary youth 
projects, coverage of flagship projects, mix 
of sovereign/non-sovereign projects, country 
income status, and fragility/transitional 
situations. The in-country review considered a 
purposive sample of 49 projects. 
 ■ Youth Entrepreneurship and Innovation Multi 
Donor Trust Fund (YEI  MDTF) case study 
assessed the only dedicated youth employment 
fund within the Bank to examine its relevance, 
efficiency, and effectiveness in contributing to 
the achievement of results of the overall JfYA 
Strategy. The YEI MDTF case study considered 
a purposive sample of 29 projects.
 ■ Flagships case study assessed the planning, 
implementation and monitoring, and 
effectiveness of the flagship programs 
undertaken under the Strategy as a coherent 
program with stated objectives and targets. 
19
Introduction
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
The case study included an in-depth review of 
all the 26 flagship program projects.
In addition, the team conducted the following reviews 
and analysis to support the evaluation findings, 
conclusions, and lessons. 
i. A portfolio review was conducted to map the 
size of the Bank portfolio, and the extent to 
which it contributes to youth employment and 
employability outcomes. This review also guided 
sampling of the country case study selections.
ii. Policy review and benchmarking study, 
which provided an assessment of the quality 
and alignment of the JfYA Strategy to other 
Bank strategies and efforts of comparator 
organizations, including the World Bank, the 
International Fund for Agricultural Development 
(IFAD), the International Labour Organization 
(ILO), United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID), and the Mastercard 
Foundation. The policy review also included 
an analysis of a sample of 15 country/regional 
integration strategy papers12 to assess the extent 
of influence of the JfYA Strategy on integration 
of youth employment considerations and results. 
Evaluation Limitations
The evaluation team experienced several limitations 
during implementation, which were mitigated to the 
extent possible, as explained below.
 ❙ Availability of data: There was limited availability 
of work programs, implementation, and progress 
reports for both project and operational activities 
directly implemented by Bank staff. Additional 
documentation requests were sent out with 
varying levels of success.
 ❙ Availability and variations in quality of data on 
jobs created and other outcomes: Most of the 
case study projects reviewed were in their early 
stages of implementation and, as such, data on 
outcomes including number of jobs created are not 
yet available. Even where such data were available 
at the project level, differences in definitions, 
scope, and/or disaggregation limited assessment 
of the extent of benefits accruing to youth. This 
limitation has been considered in the analysis and 
interpretation of the evaluation findings.
 ❙ Availability of stakeholders: The evaluation team 
faced difficulties conducting in-person interviews 
with some stakeholders during the field missions 
and benchmarking discussions with comparator 
institutions. To mitigate this, additional analyses of 
documents were also conducted to further build 
up the evidence base and triangulate information 
as far as possible. 
 ❙ Youth participation in the online surveys:  
The absence of appropriate social media 
platforms within the Bank to conduct online 
surveys affected the potential reach to a wider 
group of youth respondents. Survey findings 
presented in the report should not be interpreted 
as representative of the population of youth 
beneficiaries in AfDB programs.
 ❙ The evaluation of the JfYA Strategy did not include 
a specific review of the Bank’s jobs-related 
support as part of its COVID-19 response, as 
this has been covered under the just completed 
evaluation of the AfDB Group’s support to its 
RMCs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic 
and such support was not primarily focused on 
youth. Some aspects of the pivots experienced 
in the implementation of the JfYA Strategy as a 
result of the COVID-19 pandemic have been 
documented. 
 ❙ Assessment of contribution and attribution 
of the Bank’s investments: As a development 
finance institution, the overall objective of 
investment and activities is to stimulate economic 
growth and development, one of the outcomes of 
which is job creation. Given that the JfYA Strategy 
is a Bank-wide strategy, leveraging activities and 
finance from existing mechanisms and funds, 
20  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
it is difficult to determine the results achieved 
specifically due to the adoption of the Strategy, or 
whether these would have been achieved through 
the Bank’s business-as-usual. 

21
Overview of Youth Employment Landscape in Africa 
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Overview of Youth Employment 
Landscape in Africa 
Status of Youth Employment – 
Statistics and Trends
Africa is currently home to more than 1 billion people. 
Half of Africa’s population will be under 25 years 
of age by 2050. 13 Indeed, the proportion of young 
people is projected to increase by more than 25% 
over the next decade. 
According to the ILO, the youth unemployment 
rate in Africa has risen slightly from 11.6% in 
2016 to 12.7% in 2022. 14 There are two key areas 
of concern. First, there are significant disparities 
across the sub-regions, from over 50% youth 
unemployment in the southern regions, to under 
6% in some parts of East Africa (Figure 1). Second, 
the working poverty and underemployment 
characterizing the whole labor market in Africa, 
especially among African youth, is predominantly 
higher than in the rest of the world. In 2020, 63% 
of African youth workers lived in poverty compared 
with 50% of adult workers who were working poor 
(Figure 2). 
The high poverty levels in Africa and the dearth 
of social protection systems mean that the labor 
market challenges not only manifest through high 
youth unemployment levels, but also through 
the share of youth not in employment, education 
or training (NEET). Africa’s NEET rate of 20% is 
comparable to the global average (i.e., 20% as of 
2020). 
Some studies imply country heterogeneity in needs 
and job creation capacity through the difference 
between the labor market needs of different age 
groups.15 However, if Africa’s persistent poor labor 
market outcomes for youth are not addressed, 
Figure 2: Rate of Working Poverty Across the 
Globe, 1991–2020
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Africa Asia and the Paci/f_ic
Americas Arab States Europe and Central Asia
1991 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Figure 1: Youth Unemployment Rates Across 
Regions, 2000–2020
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Africa
Southern Africa Western Africa World
Central Africa Eastern Africa Northern Africa

22  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
this may lead to political and civil strife, persistent 
inequality, and poverty, undermining efforts to 
achieve sustainable development (particularly in 
fragile countries).
Key Challenges and Opportunities 
to Youth Employment in Africa
Macro-economy and Job Creation 
in Africa: The Issue of Jobless Growth
In recent decades, Africa’s economic growth has 
not translated into strong job creation. In 2021, 
Africa’s real gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 
close to 7%, projected to decrease to 4.1% in 2022 
and 2023 (AfDB, 2022c). However, between 2000 
and 2014, a 1% increase in GDP resulted in a mere 
0.41% increase in employment (AfDB, 2019a). 
Firstly, Africa’s economic growth is primarily 
driven by low value-added sectors that are low 
paying and not labor intensive, such as oil, mining 
and commodity exports (ILO, 2019b). Secondly, 
economic growth stems from a consistently high 
growth in population and not necessarily structural 
reforms that improve productivity. This ultimately 
undermines per capita GDP growth (ILO, 2020). 
Indeed, across all population age groups, the primary 
sectors such as agriculture are the main source of 
Africa’s jobs. Moreover, the agriculture sector itself 
is characterized by low productivity subsistence 
activities and persistent underemployment. This 
situation has been worsened by the COVID-19 
pandemic that resulted in a loss of an estimated 
22 million jobs in Africa, with a disproportionate 
effect on the youth, women, and other informal 
workers (AfDB, 2022).
Informality and the Poor Quality of Jobs
In addition to a lack of jobs, Africa also faces a 
challenge of poor quality jobs. Working poverty is 
high and acutely affects young Africans. Around 
95% of young African workers are in informal 
employment, either as wage earners or in household 
farms and firms. Regardless of the nature and 
causes of informality, countries with larger informal 
sectors tend to have less access to finance for 
the private sector, lower labor productivity, slower 
physical and human capital accumulation, and 
smaller fiscal resources (Docquier, Müller, and 
Naval, 2017; La Porta and Shleifer, 2014). Unlike 
the rest of the world, employment across all ages is 
overwhelmingly concentrated in the informal sector 
in Africa (ILO, 2020). 
In Africa, as in the rest of the world, informality 
tends to be concentrated among the least educated 
in the labor force. Africa also has a modest inverse 
relationship between age and informality, which is 
explained by the late entry into the labor force by 
more educated young Africans. In addition, living in 
rural areas significantly increases the chances of 
accessing jobs in Africa in contrasts with the rest of 
the world). However, living in rural areas reduces the 
chances of finding formal (as opposed to informal) 
employment in both Africa and the rest of the world. 
Education and Training
Though educational participation and attainment 
in Africa has increased significantly in recent 
years, its quality and gender equality remain areas 
for improvement. For example, between 2000 
and 2017, the literacy rate of young people in 
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) improved significantly 
from 65.9% to 75.4%. However, African countries 
consistently rank low on the World Bank’s Human 
Capital Index, primarily because of the low quality 
of educational outcomes. Indeed, Africa is grappling 
with both under-skilling and over-skilling. When 
looking at the current needs of the continent’s labor 
market, 29% of employed youth are under-skilled 
and 57% are undereducated, while 18% are over-
skilled and 8% are overeducated.16 On the one hand, 
this means that Africa has a large, under-utilized 
labor force. On the other hand, the “overqualified” 
youth experience low returns to education and job 
dissatisfaction. Interventions therefore need to match 
education and training to labor market demands and 
entrepreneurship opportunities, particularly in the 
rising digital economy. 
23
Overview of Youth Employment Landscape in Africa 
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
The Role of Digital Economy
Adoption of digital technologies is still a challenge 
for Africa’s entrepreneurs and workers, presenting 
a missed opportunity, especially since many digital 
technologies that are accessible through the internet 
are well-suited for the current less educated, less 
skilled workers of Africa. Examples include digital 
financial services for low-income entrepreneurs and 
the unbanked; voice- and video-based e-extension 
services for informal farms and firms; and easy to 
access gig work platforms (digital platforms that 
match workers to jobs). There is also an opportunity 
for entrepreneurs to adapt general technological 
solutions to local or niche opportunities that target 
a low-skilled workforce. Already, there is evidence 
of the digital economy’s potential to create much 
needed jobs in Africa though e-commerce platforms 
such as Jumia and Uber. During the pandemic, 
digitalization was a response to the challenges 
of lockdowns and closed borders. Building on this 
improved access could create jobs for previously 
under-served populations.
The Role of Youth Entrepreneurship
Youth entrepreneurship can create much needed 
quality jobs for young people in Africa. In a survey of 
4,000 individuals aged between 16 and 40 years, 
from Nigeria, Ghana, Angola, and Mozambique, 36% 
of participants responded that entrepreneurship was 
the source of their jobs (Forbes Insights and Djembe 
Communications, 2015). Another survey found that 
76% of Africans considered entrepreneurship as a 
good career choice (World Bank, 2019). However, 
in Africa the majority of micro and small businesses 
(including youth enterprises) fail because of high 
competition and high risk. The failure rate for 
start-ups by Africa’s youth under age 24 is particularly 
precarious. The average start-up failure rate in 
Africa was 54 percent in 2020. 17 Indeed, Africa’s 
young entrepreneurs face constraints in accessing 
formal financial institutions mostly because of lack 
of traditional collateral. An IDEV evaluation found 
that the focus of the Bank’s access to finance 
interventions on providing resources to financial 
intermediaries left many other constraints to finance 
for the under-served including young entrepreneurs, 
unaddressed. Interventions also need to better 
respond to the unique challenges faced by young 
female entrepreneurs. Despite forming the largest 
share of entrepreneurs in Africa, women’s businesses 
face greater systemic barriers to access finance and 
markets. As a result, female-led businesses are less 
productive and have fewer employees than those of 
their male counterparts.18 

25
Overview of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Overview of the Jobs for Youth 
in Africa Strategy
Strategy Goals, Approaches 
and Levers
The Jobs for Youth in Africa (JfYA) Strategy 
2016–2025 was adopted by the Bank’s Board 
of Directors in May 2016 and launched the same 
month at the Bank Group’s annual meeting in 
Lusaka, Zambia. It intends to drive inclusive growth 
on the continent and unlock the potential that 
Africa’s youth represent. The JfYA Strategy builds 
on the Ouagadougou Declaration, the Malabo 
Declaration, and the African Union’s Agenda 2063 
and African Youth Charter. The Strategy adopts 
the African Union (AU) definition of youth as those 
between 15 and 35 years of age.
The primary goal of the JfYA Strategy is to 
create 25 million jobs (i.e., 5.8 million direct and 
19.2 million indirect jobs) and equip 50 million youth19 
over the decade (2016–2025). The Strategy states 
that the Bank aims both to mobilize funding of 
UA 3.5 billion (UA 350 million per year) through a 
Jobs for Youth in Africa Facility and to leverage 
existing resources in order to meet the estimated 
UA 4.1 billion cost of implementing the JfYA Strategy. 
The JfYA Strategy has three strategic intervention 
areas: 
Integration: equipping the Bank and its RMCs to 
become engines of job creation. This is expected to 
be achieved through: 
i. Building the Bank’s capacity to address 
job creation and employment through: 
(i)  development of sector action plans as a 
framework for incorporating youth employment 
within the sector; (ii)  identification of high 
employment projects to signal technical assistance 
and or financial assistance to optimize employment 
outcomes; (iii) support to strategic procurement to 
increase the use of local content; (iv) building staff 
capacity and expertise to better deliver job creation 
outcomes; and (v) the revision of monitoring and 
evaluation systems to enable the Bank to better 
track its progress on youth employment, 
ii. Building RMC capacity and equipping them 
with the tools, guidance, and financial 
support necessary to drive policymaking and 
activities that are favorable to employment 
and entrepreneurship. Specific activities include: 
(i)  the inclusion of youth employment in country 
strategy papers (CSPs) and regional integration 
strategy papers (RISPs); (ii)  the use of Policy 
Based Operations (PBOs)20 that provide financial 
incentives to adopt policies more favorable to youth 
employment and entrepreneurship; (iii) engaging in 
policy dialogue to highlight youth employment more 
systematically; and (iv) supporting RMCs to develop 
institutional and delivery capacity necessary to 
increase employment through institutional support 
programs and targeted training, workshops and 
convenings.
Innovation: aims to incubate, implement, assess, 
and scale up promising solutions. This intervention 
area comprises three actions: 
iii. Launch of the Flagship Programs that will 
implement, assess, refine, and then roll out proven 
program models across the continent on an 
unprecedented scale. The Strategy outlined an initial 
set of six program models21 across the agriculture, 
industrialization, information, communication and 
technology sectors that, when implemented and 
26  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
rolled out across 54,400 sites, would generate an 
estimated 22 million direct and indirect jobs, and 
train an additional 24.2 million youth by 2025 and 
beyond; 
iv. Develop the Enabling Youth Employment (EYE) 
Index, an evidence-based policy tool to deepen 
dialogue on youth employment; and
v. Establish an Innovation and Information 
Lab that seeks to build evidence on existing 
interventions related to youth employment and 
entrepreneurship, incubate new ideas that aim 
to accelerate employment and entrepreneurship, 
and provide training and other support for 
entrepreneurs.
Investment: focuses on catalyzing private and 
public sector resources to fuel job creation for 
youth. This intervention area is built on three action 
areas: 
vi. Jobs for Youth in Africa Facility – Through this 
facility (to be established as a Special Fund at the 
Bank), the Bank seeks to mobilize UA 3.5 billion 
(UA 350 million per year) between 2016 and 
2025 to implement the activities as outlined in 
the JFYA Strategy. This resource envelope will 
consist of funding commitments from the Bank 
and external funders.
vii. Reducing financing risks through guarantees 
for lending to SMEs through the Africa Guarantee 
Fund and support to student loan finance 
programs to create an estimated 126,500 direct 
and indirect jobs; 
viii. Expanding access to capital through: (i)  the 
Boost Africa Investment Fund investments in 
venture equity fund of funds with employment 
effects; (ii)  the provision of local currency 
lines of credit (LoCs) for on-lending to SMEs 
through a collaboration with the Africa SME 
program; and (iii)  direct investment to grow 
youth centric businesses to create an estimated 
1,031,800 direct and indirect jobs; and
ix. Challenge prizes and other innovative results-
based financing mechanisms to incentivize 
private investment in youth employment 
challenges to create an estimated 486,700 direct 
and indirect jobs.
Together these interventions are expected to 
contribute to increased inclusive employment, 
improved development of human capital development 
across the continent, and labor markets linked to 
financial opportunities.
Portfolio Overview
Portfolio Structure and Evolution 
The Bank approved a total of 967 projects worth 
UA 31.54 billion between June 2016 and December 
2021.22 From this total, the evaluation team 
conducted a portfolio mapping to establish the extent 
of the Bank’s efforts towards JfYA objectives and 
results. The evaluation team applied the following 
definitions when screening the Bank’s interventions 
related to youth employment. 
i. Primary youth employment projects: projects that 
directly promote youth employment and employability 
and reflect this in their goals, objectives, or results. 
These projects have been intentionally designed 
and approved to address youth employment and 
employability. The evaluation has primarily focused 
on this category of projects.
ii. Secondary youth employment projects: projects 
that do not define youth employment as an 
objective/result but have potential for creating 
jobs for youth, and as such contribute to JfYA 
results. This category of projects is characterized 
by the presence of JfYA-related indicators such 
as jobs created, youth trained, SMEs supported, 
and financing made available for investments for 
youth businesses.
Based on the above, the review found that 479 or 49.5% 
of the 967 projects incorporated youth employment 
27
Overview of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
considerations. Out of the 479 projects, 176 or 36.7% 
were categorized as primary youth employment projects 
with a value of UA 5.16 billion and the remaining 
303 projects with a value of UA 14.19 billion fall in the 
secondary youth employment project category. 
This portfolio of youth employment projects is 
predominantly public sector (84.5%) compared with 
non-sovereign operations (15.5%). The majority of 
primary youth employment operations were ongoing 
(67.5%), with only 11.5% completed as of December 
2021. The remaining 21% were still at the approval 
stage. These projects cut across all sectors, with the 
majority falling within the agriculture (33.8%), social 
(17%) and governance (13.2%) sectors. 
The primary youth employment category was mainly 
funded through the African Development Bank’s 
window (UA 3.68 billion or 71.4%), followed by the 
African Development Fund (20%), and the Transition 
Support Facility (4.8%).
Over the evaluation period, the highest portion of 
the portfolio (38.5%) was located in middle-income 
countries, followed by countries in transition (35.2%) 
and the lowest portion in low-income countries (not 
transitional) at 9.1%. The review found that although 
the proportion of the JfYA-related portfolio located in 
countries in transition appears significant, it accounts 
for only 15.7%% of the total value of approvals, 
compared with the investment in middle-income 
countries at 72.7%. The highest number of primary 
youth employment projects was found in the West 
(32.4%) and East regions (18.2%), and in terms of 
value in the West (35.5%) and Central regions (20.2%).
Following a period of erratic evolution from 2016 
to 2018, the review found a gradual increase 
in the number of primary youth projects, from 
24 projects approved in 2018 to 38 projects in 
2021, corresponding to a total of UA 1.28 billion. 
Investment projects dominated the portfolio of 
primary youth employment projects (UA 3.6 billion or 
70.4% of the portfolio value), followed by program-
based operations (21.2%), results-based financing 
(4.9%), lines of credit/equity (2.3%), and institutional 
support/study (1.2%).
Youth Entrepreneurship and Innovation 
Multi Donor Trust Fund Portfolio 
The portfolio mapping also identified projects 
funded by the Youth Entrepreneurship and 
Innovation Multi Donor Trust Fund (YEI  MDTF), a 
USD 38.9 million grant vehicle established in 2017 
to support the implementation of the JfYA Strategy. 
The donors to the Trust Fund are Denmark, 
Norway, Italy, the Netherlands, and Sweden. As of 
December 2021, the YEI MDTF portfolio consisted 
of 35 projects (six completed, 15 ongoing, eight at 
the approval stage with the remaining projects at 
the preparation or commitment stage), amounting 
to USD 24.98 million (73% of overall donor 
commitments). 
The Fund supports youth entrepreneurship on 
the continent through provision of: (i)  business 
development services/BDS (representing 35% 
of the funds committed); (ii)  support to enabling 
environment focusing on technical assistance to 
fast-track policy reforms in countries (11%); and 
(iii)  research and studies to understand different 
entrepreneurship ecosystems with the intention of 
seeding ideas and catalyzing investment across the 
Bank, for employment opportunities at scale (7%). 
The remaining 47% are related to interventions that 
belong to more than one implementation area.
In terms of geographical coverage, 14 projects (40% 
of the fund operations) were located across the 
11 agreed primary focus countries.23 In line with the 
regional approach promoted since 2019 to leverage 
funding, eight Pan-African projects have benefited 
from the Fund’s support. However, the 13 remaining 
projects covering nine countries were approved 
outside of the priority list of countries for donors in 
response to urgent needs and requests from RMCs. 

29
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Findings
Relevance 
This section examines the extent of relevance of 
the Strategy, given the changing operating context, 
appropriateness of the levers, and alignment of the 
Strategy to national and corporate priorities, as well 
as other International Financial Institutions.
The JfYA Strategy was found to be relevant 
for addressing youth employment challenges 
across the African continent. However, the 
changing economic growth context, recurrent 
risks, and unrealistic expectations are 
undermining its validity and the realism of its 
targets. 
Alignment with Needs and Priorities
The evaluation found that the Bank’s JfYA 
Strategy and projects/programs are aligned 
with RMCs’ development strategies, needs and 
visions, as reflected in their policy documents, 
medium-term plans, and strategy papers. 
Desk review and country field missions showed that 
in countries where youth employment and upskilling 
are already a priority (Morocco, Malawi, Senegal, 
and Kenya), the AfDB is better positioned, and has 
benefited from synergies in identifying opportunities 
for support and leverage this mutual objective. 
Examples are:
In Kenya, the government’s third medium-term 
plan 2018–2022, endeavors to develop relevant 
human capital through TVET to attain its Big Four 
Agenda. The Bank’s TVET project aligns well with the 
country’s investments in TVET infrastructure. 
In the DRC, the main framework for government 
development efforts is outlined in its National 
Strategic Development Plan. The plan outlines the 
objectives for the country’s development for all 
governmental and partner activities for the period 
2019–2023. Both the human capital development 
and consolidation of economic growth and 
transformation of the economy objectives are in 
close alignment with the projects implemented 
under the JfYA Strategy. 
In Malawi, government stakeholders revealed good 
alignment between the challenges in Malawi’s youth 
employment landscape and the JfYA Strategy, with a 
shared focus on the sustainability and scalability of 
youth-owned enterprises to create jobs.
In Senegal, some of the AfDB’s funded projects 
were found to be in line with the country’s National 
Employment Policy, which aims to establish a 
conducive environment for economic growth, build 
youth capacity, create jobs and generate revenues for 
both youth and women. For example, the Project to 
Support and Enhance the Entrepreneurial Initiatives 
of Women and Young People implemented by the 
Delegation Entreprenariat Rapide, attempts to create 
the conditions for a strong and dynamic private 
sector to drive growth through the establishment 
of economic clusters in alignment with the JfYA 
Strategy. 
In Morocco, the Support Program for Financial 
Inclusion, Entrepreneurship and Micro-
enterprises for Economic Recovery, a stand-alone 
programmatic support operation is in full alignment 
with the country’s priorities and directly supports 
the national Integrated Program for Enterprise 
Support and Financing Fund through improved 
financial services to young entrepreneurs to create 
80,000 direct jobs. 
30  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
Through the JfYA Strategy, the evaluation found 
that the Bank has been able to advocate for 
greater emphasis of youth employment in country 
strategy papers (CSPs) and therefore contribute 
to a better alignment of Bank assistance with 
country needs. A comparison of CSPs approved 
before and after the adoption of the JfYA Strategy 
shows some improvements in the incorporation of 
youth employment in the CSP design for eight out 
of 15 CSPs assessed. These are Lesotho, Senegal, 
Tunisia, and Uganda, also four countries in transition, 
namely Mali, Togo, Tunisia and the DRC. 
Relevance of the Bank’s Strategic Levers 
The evaluation found the three strategic 
levers of the JfYA Strategy to be relevant for 
addressing the needs and opportunities for youth 
employment in Africa. For example, the Integration 
lever that requires mainstreaming youth employment 
across the Bank and all of its investments was found 
to be necessary to achieve the desired scale of the 
JfYA Strategy. This mainstreaming approach is in line 
with best practices of comparator institutions such 
as IFAD and the World Bank on scaling employment 
impact. In addition, the fact that integration focuses 
on building and engaging RMCs to integrate youth 
employment in programming and policy reforms 
further supports scalability and sustainability.
The Innovation lever addresses critical labor supply 
and demand issues through the various initiatives 
in the flagship program projects, the Innovation Lab 
and YEI MDTF-funded activities on entrepreneurship 
ecosystem development activities. Ongoing projects 
provide training focused on equipping the youth 
with productive and employable skills. However, 
inadequate coordination of enterprise development 
activities across the Bank and the low scale of 
implementation compared with the level of need 
were found to undermine the relevance, as discussed 
further under the Effectiveness Section. Flagship 
models focus on sectors of agriculture, industry, and 
information, communication, and technology (ICT), 
considered as the most promising for large-scale 
employment opportunities for the youth and RMCs, is 
relevant to the needs of the continent. However, the 
assumption that these pre-designed flagship program 
models would be adopted with customization within 
pre-determined levels did not sufficiently consider 
RMC priorities or anticipate the economic impacts of 
unanticipated crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic. 
This affected the levels of uptake and, subsequently, 
implementation in line with the original design, 
limiting opportunities for assessment of efficacy of 
the different flagship models. Addressing evaluation 
and knowledge management on promising youth 
employment interventions is critical in responding to 
future information needs for both new and ongoing 
programs. 
The Investment lever’s focus on SME support was 
found to be relevant, as it enacts a partnership with 
the private sector for job creation, the largest creator 
of jobs on the continent. Comparator organizations 
highlighted that partnership with the private sector as 
one of the strengths of the JfYA Strategy. The Bank is 
using multiple channels to address access to finance 
barriers for youth. However, the limited targeting 
and use of inappropriate financial instruments 
under the investment pillar was found to undermine 
relevance. Pre-existing financial inclusion support, 
including the Africa SME program, has been included 
under the JfYA Strategy but the target groups and 
implementation were not adapted to directly target 
and monitor impact on youth-led businesses. Up to 
60% of the financial sector portfolio is composed of 
lines of credit that have been found to have limited 
impact on disadvantaged groups including youth 
(AfDB, 2020). On a positive note, the use of equity 
in venture capital funds targeting start-ups and 
other primary youth employment projects (including 
flagship program projects) are more directly 
addressing access to finance barriers for youth. 
The evaluation found that the JfYA Strategy 
recognizes differences in employment barriers 
for different categories of the youth, 24 but has 
not consistently provided for tailored responses 
to them. Though the Strategy does not distinguish 
between age cohorts of the youth, its skilling 25 and 
job creation efforts target both the new entrants 
31
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
to the workforce, as well as those already working 
but who are seeking different opportunities. The 
Strategy makes specific considerations for the 
youth in rural areas, informal sectors, women and 
those in fragile situations. For example, the youth in 
countries with fragile situations and informality are 
a priority for the YEI MDTF and flagship programs. 
Up to 33.5% of overall primary youth employment 
operations are located in countries in transition. 
The JfYA Strategy specified that all activities target 
50% or more women but did not specify how this 
target would be reached how programs should 
address the unique barriers faced by women. In 
the course of implementation, interventions have 
been adapted to reach more young women with 
varying levels of success. Also, institutional barriers 
to addressing access to finance for the informal 
sector are still not sufficiently addressed under 
ongoing programs.
Strategy Design
The Strategy outlines a Theory of Change but 
it lacks sufficient detail to inform priorities in 
outcomes and useful measures of success. The 
JfYA Strategy’s high-level ToC outlines three strategic 
levers of integration, innovation, and investment to 
increase inclusive employment and entrepreneurship, 
strengthen human capital, and create durable labor-
market linkages and thereby economic opportunities 
for the youth. Though details within the JfYA Strategy 
Implementation Plan indicate mechanisms and 
causal linkages, the illustration and narrative does 
not adequately describe the impact pathways of the 
strategic levers or pillars towards achieving the three 
intended outcomes. This has affected the choice 
and prioritization of key intermediate outcomes and 
their measures of success. As will be indicated in 
subsequent sections, the JfYA Strategy Results 
Measurement Framework has up to 40 indicators, 
42% of which were found not to be directly relevant 
and useful for tracking outcomes. The evaluation 
also found that ambiguities in the key outcome level 
indicators of jobs created and youth equipped have 
subsequently hindered consistent implementation, 
monitoring and reporting on results. The evaluation 
elaborates more on these disconnects in other 
sections of the report. 
The evaluation found that the intentions of 
the JfYA Strategy were clear, although the 
assumptions behind the projected targets 
were not found to be sufficiently explicit and 
realistic. The JfYA Strategy provides the Bank with 
quantifiable targets around youth employment that 
can be a basis for dialogue, resource mobilization 
and communication/visibility around the Bank’s 
efforts. The Bank has been able to mobilize and 
invest UA 5.16 billion in primary youth employment 
projects and an additional UA 14.19 billion in 
secondary youth employment projects. In addition, 
the Bank was able to mobilize resources to establish 
a USD 38.9 million multi donor grant vehicle, 
YEI  MDTF, to support the implementation of the 
Strategy. The Bank also mobilized a commitment to 
youth employment in the latest 7 th General Capital 
Increase (GC-VII) and 15th African Development Fund 
(ADF)-15 replenishments with specific targets for 
decent jobs and skills development. 
However, the evaluation found that underlying 
assumptions behind the targets are not as well 
understood across staff and have not been updated 
following changes in implementation of some 
components of the strategy.26 Assumptions that the 
Coding for Employment (CfE) program that focuses 
on training and linking graduates could create 
9 million jobs are not backed by evidence. Available 
research indicates that training alone does not create 
jobs.27 Though skills development is essential, it does 
not create as many jobs and should therefore not 
be expected to make the largest contribution to job 
outcomes within the 10–15-year period. In addition, 
overly optimistic expectations of achieving over 85% 
of the JfYA Strategy job creation and training targets 
through the roll-out of demand-driven flagship program 
models funded through a not-yet-established Special 
Fund/Facility undermine the strength of the design 
of the Strategy. As will be discussed in subsequent 
sections, the Bank did adapt implementation to 
address some of these shortcomings but this still 
affected the rate of achievement of targets. 
32  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
The evaluation also found that, despite the naming 
of the Strategy as Jobs for Youth, it is not clear 
which proportion of these jobs are expected to be 
youth jobs. The Strategy assumes that with a median 
age for the continent at 19.5 years, inevitably most of 
the job impact will accrue to youth. 28 This ambiguity 
is translated across projects, with varying attention to 
creation of jobs for youth vis-à-vis women and other 
population groups, and measurement systems that 
are not set up to disaggregate for age. The evaluation 
found that in comparison with the World Bank, the AfDB 
focuses more on quantitative aspects of job creation and 
not as much on more qualitative aspects related to the 
quality and nature of jobs created. Africa’s employment 
problem is more related to underemployment and quality 
of work, evidenced by the high levels of informality.
Though risks to the Strategy were identified, the 
evaluation found that the risk mitigation measures 
have not been sufficiently implemented, thereby 
continuing to pose a threat to achievement of 
Strategy targets. Both the Strategy document and 
the Implementation Plan identify several high-level 
risks that could affect implementation and results. The 
evaluation found that mitigation measures have not 
been sufficiently implemented and therefore the risks 
remain a threat to achievement of intended results. 
Specifically, the shortfalls in funding for specific 
elements of the Strategy and staffing, and low support 
for uptake of flagship program models, are impacting 
the pace and scale of delivery. Even when mitigation 
measures were identified, there was no action plan 
and accompanying milestones developed to guide 
implementation, nor regular monitoring on the status 
and implications of the risks. Further analysis of the 
mitigation measures on bank resources and systems 
and implemented adaptations are discussed in the 
Section on Effectiveness and the Section on Adequacy 
of Bank System. 
Key changes in the global context have emerged 
to significantly affect implementation progress 
and the likelihood of the achievement of Strategy 
targets. However, the Bank has used the JfYA 
framework to respond to some of these occurrences. 
The original Strategy Theory of Change did not explicitly 
identify critical assumptions that could influence 
achievement of Strategy goals. While the Bank could 
not have foreseen the magnitude and impact of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, the evaluation found that 
there was inadequate explicit attention to the effects 
of the macroeconomy, economic growth rates, and 
climate change effects on job creation. The pandemic 
precipitated major (albeit unforeseen) economic shocks 
that have subsequently affected availability of Bank 
resources for programs, as well as country headroom,29 
and the ability and willingness to take loans for youth 
employment projects. In 2020, both Bank and RMC 
resources were reallocated to support citizens and 
businesses to weather the pandemic. Worsening social 
and economic conditions also resulted in the loss of 
jobs, opportunities for internships, and job placements, 
as well as dampening overall enterprise growth as 
economies contracted. The Bank has used the JfYA 
Strategy framework to respond to the COVID-19 
pandemic and climate change effects through targeted 
programs, and youth-led innovations in climate change 
and resilience, as well as an emerging focus on green 
jobs as countries transition to green economies. 
Adaptations to support RMCs in their response to the 
pandemic are discussed in the Section on Integration 
Section and in more detail in this IDEV evaluation. 
Interviews with Task Managers also revealed that 
political instability negatively affected project 
implementation, as well as the ability of RMCs to 
attract private sector investment for the ongoing 
implementation of the Strategy in transition states. 
Incidences of stalled and/or canceled projects due 
to instability were observed in Guinea, Mali and 
Eritrea. Other geo-political events, such as Russia’s 
invasion of Ukraine 30 and food crises, have further 
constrained resources; affecting economic growth, 
enterprise performance, and the prospects for job 
creation. 
Coherence
This section assesses the extent of coherence of the 
Strategy internally with other Bank strategies and 
policies and externally with other partners’ efforts.
33
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Coherence with other Bank strategies: 
Coordination and value added to Bank 
strategies
The JfYA Strategy aligns well with the Bank’s 
current Ten-Year Strategy and other strategies.  
The AfDB is currently considered a leader in youth 
employment efforts at present, being one of the 
main development institutions on the continent with 
a focused and named strategy to address this issue. 
As the continent’s leading development finance 
institution, with the ultimate objectives of spurring 
inclusive and green growth on the continent, a 
focus on youth employment is inevitable considering 
the current economic context and demographic 
make-up. Specifically, the Bank’s TYS 2013–2022 
emphasizes job creation, and provides clear scope 
and relevance for the JfYA Strategy as a Bank-wide 
priority. The TYS has a specific focus on achieving 
inclusive growth through decent jobs and enhancing 
economic opportunities for the youth.31 This alignment 
is important in ensuring that all of the Bank’s activities 
are contributing towards the same objectives. 
Furthermore, the evaluation found that the JfYA 
Strategy aligns and is additive to other strategies 
of the Bank. The JfYA Strategy is aligned with its 
cross-cutting sectoral strategies, including the 
Private Sector Development Strategy 2013–2017 
and subsequent 2021–2025 Strategy, the Financial 
Sector Development Strategy 2014–2019, the 
Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa Strategy 
2022–2026, the Gender Strategy 2021–2025, 
and the Strategy for Economic Governance in 
Africa 2021–2025.32 There are notable areas of 
convergence between these strategies, specifically 
the focus on human capital development (including 
skills development), the recognition of the importance 
of the demographic dividend and harnessing its 
benefits, and the prioritization of private sector-led 
growth through private sector development. 
Most recent developments within the Bank’s policy 
and program framework, specifically, the Skills for 
Employability and Productivity in Africa (SEPA) Action 
Plan 2022–2025, is anchored to and aligns with the 
guiding principles and goals of the JfYA Strategy. 
Specifically, SEPA intends to scale up the skills 
component of the JfYA Strategy, with a special focus 
on Science, Technology and Mathematics in higher 
education; TVET; digital technology beyond coding; 
and online learning skills infrastructure. The SEPA 
will provide support for an environment conducive 
to skills development for job creation and youth 
entrepreneurship. 
The JfYA Strategy intends to elevate youth 
employment and employability to the level of 
Bank-wide importance, while also consolidating 
a variety of activities that were already in place 
to address employment and entrepreneurship.  
However, the evaluation found that the mechanisms 
for coordination and oversight for such a Bank-wide 
endeavor have not been adequately provided (Section 
on Adequacy of Bank Systems has more details).  
The evaluation found that some Strategy 
interventions were not aligned with and feasible 
within the Bank systems and were subsequently 
not implemented. These include provision of 
computation thinking in secondary schools, as AfDB 
education activities are limited to higher education 
and TVET. Actions intended to increase the Bank’s 
knowledge of, and work in using, procurement to 
increase local content were not found additive to 
what was already going on and therefore did not 
take off. In the absence of systems and frameworks 
for implementation, the provision of student loans for 
higher education was not initiated.
External coherence
The JfYA Strategy seeks to complement and 
amplify the ambitions and efforts of other 
stakeholders. First, the Strategy directly supports 
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 
(UN SDGs) that elevate decent work and economic 
growth under SDG  8. The JfYA Strategy also aligns 
well and supports implementation of the African Union 
(AU) ambitions for youth development. The AU has 
several youth development policies and programs 
aimed at ensuring the continent benefits from the 
34  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
demographic dividend. The policies include the African 
Youth Charter, the Youth Decade Plan of Action, and 
the Malabo Decision on Youth Empowerment.
Synergy at the country level. Synergy at the 
country level was assessed through the extent 
to which the JfYA Strategy helped to strengthen 
complementarity, and bring value to strategies and 
programs of other development partners. 
The country case studies revealed examples of 
strong leadership in donor coordination by the 
Bank. In Senegal and the DRC, the Bank chaired 
or co-chaired thematic groups in charge of youth 
employment. In other instances, the Bank played 
an influential role by generating useful knowledge, 
and providing platforms and resources on youth 
employment initiatives. This was the case for the 
Entrepreneurship Innovations and Advices platform 
led by the Jobs team in North Africa that mapped 
all Enterprise Support Organizations (ESOs) with the 
aim of fostering collaboration and synergy. 
The evaluation showed that the Bank mobilized 
co-funding opportunities with other development 
partners. The evaluation found that the Bank’s 
primary youth employment projects of UA 5.16 billion 
leveraged an additional UA 2.8 billion from government 
and other partners. For example, in Senegal, the Bank 
was able to leverage EUR 20 million in co-financing 
from the Agence Française de Développement 
(AFD) in the Project to Support and Enhance the 
Entrepreneurial Initiatives of Women and Young 
People. Another remarkable example of the leveraging 
effect of the Bank’s products is the feasibility study 
for the Investment in Digital and Creative Enterprises 
Program (I-DICE) funded by the YEI MDTF that led to the 
unlocking of funding and co-financing opportunities 
of USD 618 million within the Bank and from other 
donors, including AFD, the Islamic Development Bank, 
the Government of Nigeria and the private sector. 
The YEI  MDTF was found responsive to the 
multi-donor strategic priorities. 33 Stakeholder 
engagements revealed a broad alignment between 
YEI MDTF’s objectives and their respective strategies 
and support for youth entrepreneurship in Africa. 
Despite changes in some of the donor policies and 
priorities, support for youth employment remains an 
important issue and confirms the relevance of the JfYA 
Strategy.  
Effectiveness
This section assesses the extent of implementation 
of the key actions of the Strategy, progress towards 
meeting the objectives of JfYA Strategy at mid-term 
(2021), the results achieved and/or the likelihood of 
achieving intended results. The first section reviews 
the Bank’s progress towards the achievement of key 
outputs and outcome indicators, and the second section 
provides a detailed analysis of implementation progress 
of JfYA Strategy actions across the three strategic levers 
of Integration, Innovation and Investment.
Progress towards the achievement 
of outputs and outcomes
Though Bank interventions were found to be 
creating jobs and equipping the youth, actual 
progress towards achievement of strategy 
results and outcomes is difficult to establish due 
to significant monitoring and reporting gaps.
In this mid-term evaluation, the team attempted 
to map progress against the targets set out in the 
Strategy’s RMF.34
General performance: Of the 36 JfYA Strategy 
RMF indicators considered for this assessment, 
only 36% (13/36) were found to have up-to-date 
information. The evaluation also found that only 
six of the 13 indicators with data registered an 
achievement of ≥50% at mid-term. 35 Apart from 
one indicator on youth trained in coding centers, all 
other indicators performing at ≥50% are output-level 
indicators related to staff training, the development 
of sector action plans, and the integration of youth 
35
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
employment considerations in CSPs. This progress 
should be interpreted with caution as the JfYA 
Strategy RMF targets were never broken down into 
annual targets which would have enabled a more 
accurate mid-term performance assessment.36 
The evaluation cannot establish progress on the 
remaining indicators, due to the lack of reporting 
and/or inconsistencies in existing information. Data 
are available in some form for eight out of 23 indicators, 
but these data are not useable for this analysis due 
to variations in indicator names/definitions making 
aggregation of results across the portfolio difficult. In 
other cases, the data have not been disaggregated 
appropriately to assess progress. Generally, the issue of 
consistency in indicators and what is actually measured 
affects 24 of the 36 indicators assessed for the MTE. 
Some of these indicators were not found to be relevant 
for the JfYA Strategy and/or feasible for data collection 
within the Bank systems. More discussion on the 
underlying challenges to indicator tracking is covered 
in the section for M&E. Furthermore, only 11.5% of 
primary youth employment projects were completed 
during the evaluation period. This implies that it is still 
too early for some output- and outcome-level results 
to materialize.
Progress towards high-level results of job 
creation and equipping the youth
Jobs created. The Strategy targeted to create 
5.8 million direct jobs for youth and 19.2 million indirect 
and induced jobs, including for individuals other 
than youth, over the decade 2016–2025. However, 
it anticipated that some of the 25 million jobs will 
be realized after 2025, given that the job creation 
impacts of newly approved projects towards the end 
of the Strategy would not be available by 2025. The 
timeline for the job creation target in the Strategy’s 
RMF is 2030. Lack of clarity and inconsistencies in the 
timeline for achievement of the target were found to 
have complicated planning and monitoring processes.
In terms of progress against targets, as can be seen 
from Table 1, Bank Management has estimated that 
projects approved between 2016 and 2021 will create 
3,076,881 direct jobs and 9,276,199 indirect jobs 
over the period 2016–2021, which represents a 49% 
expected achievement of the target (25 million jobs). 
The expected results for jobs created for women are 
promising but below the 50% target. Performance 
in 2020 and 2021 was lower due to the COVID-19-
related delays on project designs and approvals, and 
the re-allocation of funds.
The evaluation found significant issues with 
the information on direct jobs, which affects 
estimations and conclusions on performance.  
First, the number of expected direct jobs reported is 
not disaggregated by age to enable the estimation 
of progress against the 5,800,000 jobs intended 
for youth (the same applies to the indirect jobs 
data). Generally, the evaluation found no aggregated 
information across the Bank on actual jobs accruing 
to youth; rather, in line with the JfYA strategy, the Bank 
assumes that since youth form the largest proportion 
Table 1: Direct and Indirect Jobs Expected to be Created
Jobs to be created Approval Year
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2016–2021
Direct Jobs 731,039 197,651 318,290 821,307 187,970 820,624 3,076,881
Women 322,706 87,250 136,456 393,835 80,754  337,242 1,358,243
Indirect Jobs 1,926,344 2,291,961 1,550,310 2,230,022 393,918 883,644 9,276,199
Women 877,370 1,043,893 716,018 1,028,256  173,885  383,503 4,222,925
Total Jobs 2,657,383 2,489,612 1,868,600 3,051,329 581,888 1,704,268 12,353,080
Women 1,200,076 1,131,143 852,474 1,422,092 254,639 722,745 5,581,168
Source: SNDR records
36  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
of the labor force, they are inherently benefiting most 
from any new jobs created. Second, the Bank is using 
only data on expected direct jobs to monitor the 
Strategy. The expected jobs data compiled by SNDR 
are based on estimations made in the ex-ante project 
appraisal reports (PARs) and do not represent the actual 
number of jobs created. While the latter is available 
through project completion reports (PCRs)/expanded 
supervision reports (XSRs), it is not used for monitoring 
and reporting about the strategy. A quick analysis of 
the difference between planned and reported results 
for direct jobs from PCRs/XSRs revealed significant 
variations, especially for sovereign operations. For 
example, a set of 124 sovereign projects with PCRs 
completed between 2016 and 2021 revealed that only 
67% of planned jobs were delivered, compared with 
98% for the 50 non-sovereign operations (NSOs) with 
XSRs produced in the same time period. This suggests 
that the use of job creation estimates from PARs could 
result in under- or over-reporting, arising from actual 
implementation experiences. The evaluation team was 
informed that the Bank is developing a job estimation 
approach based on project disbursements to establish 
actual jobs created by its projects.
For these reasons, it is not possible for the evaluation 
to say with certainty how far the Strategy has 
progressed in its aim to create 25 million jobs. 
Youth equipped/trained. The evaluation did not 
find any aggregated information on numbers of 
the youth equipped or trained as a result of Bank 
investments to enable assessment of progress 
towards the “50 million youth reached” target. The 
Strategy states that this indicator is a combination of 
the beneficiaries of the direct, indirect and induced 
jobs, as well as the youth benefiting from training 
activities. This definition poses significant validity 
and reliability risks. For example, “jobs created” 
data include age groups other than the youth as 
targeted by this indicator. In addition, combining 
jobs creation and results from training will lead to 
double reporting, especially for the youth cohort who 
undergo both training and acquire jobs as a result 
of AfDB assistance. Other corporate RMF indicators 
tracking training and skills development (i.e., the 
number of people trained with Bank assistance and 
the number of people benefiting from better access 
to education) also carry similar risks as they are 
either not disaggregated by age or at risk of being 
under-reported or over-reported. 
Portfolio quality and performance. As a whole, 
primary youth employment projects suffered from 
delay at start-up, 37 especially for infrastructure 
projects, which took the longest time to first 
disbursement (at least nine months). This is not 
peculiar to youth employment projects. Out of 
176 primary youth employment projects for which 
quality ratings were available, the portfolio flashlight 
of the Bank (in June 2022) showed that more 
than half (57.5%) had no implementation issues, 
39.7% were displaying some alerts (potentially 
problematic), and three projects were problematic. 
Agriculture and social sectors recorded the highest 
number of flagged projects with, respectively, 44.4% 
and 17.8%. First disbursement delays (48.7%) and 
slow procurement (34%) were identified as the most 
recurrent issues impeding the implementation of 
primary youth employment projects. 
Integration
Despite slow progress in internal systems 
strengthening activities, integration of youth 
employment considerations in its operations 
across the Bank was found to be occurring. 
Interventions to strengthen RMC capacity to 
address youth employment are also ongoing, but 
results are not yet evident. All planned integration 
actions are ongoing, with varying levels of 
progress in implementation of sub-activities.
Equipping the Bank
Sector action plans were found to have been 
developed but do not seem to be used. By 2017, 
12 departments had drafted sector action plans, 
intended to guide the operationalization of youth 
37
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
employment in projects/programs design. This 
exceeded the original target of five departments. 
However, the evaluation found no evidence of the 
use of these plans. None of the Task Managers 
interviewed about sector action plans expressed 
awareness of their existence. It should be noted that, 
since the JfYA Strategy was approved in 2016, there 
has been a restructuring of departments, through 
which leadership changes could have impacted 
attention to youth employment sector action plans. 
Similarly, the planned categorization and 
tagging of “high employment” label to certain 
projects, enabling them to receive extra support 
in the form of technical assistance and funding 
from the Jobs team resources has not happened 
as planned. The evaluation found no list of high 
employment projects. Apart from the Additionality 
and Development Outcomes Assessment 
Framework (ADOA) system that assesses job 
creation impacts of non-sovereign operations, there 
are currently no other systems within the Bank to 
enable the tagging of youth employment projects.38  
A Jobs and Skills Marker System, critical 
to achieving systematic integration and 
measurement of employment impacts, is being 
developed. In 2021, the Bank in collaboration with 
the ILO embarked on developing a JSMS to support 
an aggregate understanding of the Bank’s work 
on employment and better portfolio management 
through a clear identification of projects, targeted 
technical assistance, and the use of streamlined 
indicators. Stakeholder engagements in the course 
of the evaluation emphasized that, without specific 
guidance and status as a mandatory requirement, 
the integration of youth employment considerations 
into projects and reporting will be challenging. The 
JSMS is anticipated to fulfill this role by drawing 
on lessons from the Bank’s Gender Marker (see 
Box 2). Integration of youth employment in IFAD was 
reported to be more successful when combined 
with incentives and accountability structures within 
the institution. These included integration in KPIs, 
as well as prizes and awards for successful staff.
Following the situational analysis, the Bank intends 
to pilot the JSMS in selected countries in 2023 
before rolling it out across all Bank operations. The 
JSMS will be accompanied by guidance materials, 
training and a toolkit as part of Bank’s Operations 
Academy modules to develop the competencies, 
and facilitate effective use and integration across 
sectors.
Staff training and capacity-building activities were 
found to have stalled. Apart from the initial training 
of 203 staff in 2017/18, other targeted training and 
workshops, Bank-wide town halls, and SAP review 
meetings have not been consistently held, limiting 
opportunities for raising greater awareness, shared 
learning and development. While the number of staff 
trained exceeds the Strategy target of 200 Bank staff 
by 2025, the evaluation found that many of the current 
Task Managers joined the Bank from 2018 onwards 
and were therefore not in their roles at the time of 
Box 2: The AfDB Gender Marker
In 2017, AfDB adopted a Gender Marker System as a systematic approach for gender mainstreaming in its operations 
work to maximize impact on reducing gender gaps and make the best use of gender resources. This marker system 
categorizes the Bank’s projects based on the level of their expected contribution to gender equality and /or women’s 
empowerment. The gender marker has been fundamental enabling the gender team and other departments to 
integrate gender in operations right from the beginning of the project lifecycle. Frameworks, tools and indicators that 
can be adapted and easily incorporated have been developed and made available to staff. With these tools, the task of 
incorporating gender targets and other relevant considerations is easier and more straightforward for task managers. 
Bank documentation revealed an increase in the number of projects that have a gender-informed design from 70% 
in 2017 to 87% in 2022. In addition, multiple stakeholders referenced ‘gender’ as being successfully integrated and 
continuously considered. Every project report reviewed had an allocated percentage of targets for women where 
relevant.
38  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
the initial training. In addition, a “youth employment” 
training module developed for integration into the 
Bank’s Operations Academy to enable ongoing access 
for incoming staff is not yet available. Nevertheless, 
some opportunities for raising greater awareness on 
the JfYA Strategy within the Bank have been through 
the YEI MDTF focused brown bag sessions, providing 
opportunities for elaboration on the Strategy and youth 
employment. However, these sessions are ad-hoc and 
do not serve the purpose for promoting continuous 
learning on youth employment within the Bank.
The Jobs team indicated that staff training activities and 
dissemination of sector-specific guides for integration 
of youth employment considerations were discontinued 
in the absence of funding. This break in training has 
impacted on the extent of integration and consistency in 
tracking jobs and youth employment outcomes across 
the Bank. Some Task Managers consulted in the course 
of the evaluation expressed difficulties in addressing 
youth employment in their operations due to inadequate 
guidance (including absence of guidelines and tools), 
as well as limited understanding of estimation and 
measurement of job creation effects.
Despite this slow progress, there was evidence 
of the integration of youth employment 
components into sector operations, albeit not 
at the anticipated level and pace. The portfolio 
review revealed that nearly half of the portfolio 
of AfDB projects (i.e., 49.5%) approved between 
2016 and 2021 had elements of youth employment 
or supported employability through job creation 
and enterprise development. Nearly 84% of 
these youth employment projects (404/479) are 
managed by other departments outside AHHD that 
houses the Jobs team. Through discussions with 
Bank staff and document review, the evaluation 
found that JfYA Strategy resources, i.e., staff 
and financial resources, have been deployed to 
support high-potential projects, to support project 
design and implementation (as peer reviewers, 
co-task managers, financial assistance to conduct 
assessments or feasibility studies), as well as 
providing important co-financing for innovative youth 
employment components. 
Equipping Regional Member Countries
The intended integration of youth employment 
in CSPs/RISPs was not found to sufficiently 
translate into youth specific commitments. The 
evaluation found that though youth unemployment 
is highlighted as a pressing issue across the sample 
of CSPs assessed, the corresponding actions were 
not commensurate. Up to 70% of CSPs drafted after 
the JfYA Strategy approval include some mention of 
it. However, only 43% of CSPs that made specific 
reference to the JfYA Strategy have translated this 
into a dedicated youth employment indicator. All 
the five RISPs include intentions of furthering youth 
employment but this is translated into an indicator 
in only one of them. The absence of translation of 
issues into youth employment specific results and/or 
indicators weakens the commitment by both the Bank 
and country in directly addressing this challenge. 
Increased focus on private sector development 
especially with regards to micro, small and medium 
enterprise (MSME) creation (reflected in 85% of CSPs 
reviewed) presents opportunities for addressing 
youth employment. A more vibrant private sector 
provides opportunities for young entrepreneurs 
and generates jobs. It is important to note that 
operationalizing these opportunities for the youth 
requires an intentional targeting and/or tailoring of 
interventions to address specific barriers faced by 
young people (IFAD, 2014: World Economic Forum, 
2016). 
Intentions to include a youth employment challenge 
section in CSPs that highlights RMC efforts on youth 
employment and a listing of the areas for Bank 
support in addressing JfYA Strategy considerations 
in the CSPs have not been achieved. The evaluation 
found that Country Economists and AHHD /Jobs staff 
have an important role in guiding relevant country-
specific analysis needed for CSPs to be a grounding 
document, and that projects are tailored to specific 
country needs. 
The Bank continues to use Program Based 
Operations and Institutional Support Projects 
39
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
to strengthen RMC capacity and the enabling 
environment for youth employment outcomes. 
Program Based Operations: Between July 2016 
and December 2021, the Bank approved a total of 
77 youth employment related PBOs with a focus 
on creating an enabling environment for the youth 
and youth-led enterprises. The portfolio review 
further revealed that 21% of these PBOs (16/77) fall 
under the primary youth employment category and 
79% (61/76) are categorized as secondary youth 
employment projects. Addressing youth employment 
issues was often part of a package of wider reform 
efforts, as anticipated in the Strategy Implementation 
Plan. 
In 2020, the Bank established a UA 7.4 billion 
COVID-19 Response Facility (CRF) that included 
business protection and job creation as part of 
supporting RMCs to deal with social and economic 
impacts of the pandemic. The Jobs team played a 
significant role in the design of the Facility, bringing 
in the focus on protection of enterprises and jobs 
as part of strengthening economic resilience and 
recovery. The 35 CRF operations addressing youth 
employment valued at UA 1.8 billion make up 27.5% 
of the primary and secondary youth employment 
PBO portfolio over the period. However, the just 
completed COVID-19 response evaluation by IDEV 
found that this specific component registered a 
modest performance, largely due to over-ambitious 
targets against limited resources, and the limited 
involvement of private sector actors in design of 
the program. The evaluation also found that the 
implementation time (on average 12 months) was 
inadequate to realize the full benefits.
Institutional Support Projects: Over the evaluation 
period, the Bank supported 18 Institutional Support 
Projects39 aimed at building the capacity of RMCs 
to implement youth employment policies and 
programming. These ISPs included research/
sector assessments, capacity development of 
key institutions and development of policies, and 
regulatory frameworks (in the areas of employment, 
market-driven skills development, MSME growth and 
financing) and strengthening labor market information 
systems to inform youth employment policies. Nearly 
all the ISPs (17/18) are either at the approval or 
ongoing stages, with no significant results to evaluate 
as yet. Other Bank-funded regulatory framework-
strengthening activities in stand-alone projects 
or embedded in broader investment activities are 
providing promising results (see Box 3).
The evaluation also found examples of projects 
strengthening national systems for furthering youth 
employment through the use of local content. 
Supporting the use of local content to advance youth 
employment was found to be easier in countries 
where it is already prioritized as evidenced in Kenya, 
Rwanda and Morocco. Other anticipated Bank-led 
training of RMCs to build capacity to implement and 
measure youth employment ambitions has not taken 
place as planned. Findings from country case studies 
indicate that the availability of adequate labor-market 
information, coordination of employment services 
and various youth employment projects, and the 
monitoring and measuring employment impacts of 
projects are still challenges experienced by countries. 
Influence of policy dialogue on elevating youth 
employment considerations within RMCs is 
difficult to establish. Since the launch of the 
Box 3: Examples of Enabling Environment Activities
Under Malawi’s Jobs for Youth Project, a Business and Incubation Strategy was developed in conjunction with the 
Ministry of Trade and Industry. In line with the new strategy, an accreditation system has been developed to ensure 
systematic quality control of services provided by incubators and Business Development Services  providers. The Jobs 
for Youth Project also supported much needed reviews of the National Council of Youth, Malawi Act and the National 
Youth Policy. Malawi government stakeholders met during field visits expressed appreciation of these JfYA projects 
for modernizing the regulatory framework and improving coherence among the different youth related legislations.
40  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
Strategy in 2016, the Bank has used various fora and 
publications to highlight and garner action from both 
public and private sector actors on addressing youth 
employment. These have included regional ministerial 
dialogues held in 2017, Bank annual meetings, ADF 
replenishment meetings and signature events such 
as the annual Africa Economic Conference, the Africa 
Investment Forum and other regional platforms such 
as the Africa Union–European Union Summit and Youth 
Connekt. The evaluation found that dialogue on youth 
employment continues to occur at the country level 
through country and regional office teams. While some 
examples of outcomes of high-level dialogue exist, the 
evaluation was inconclusive on the extent to which this 
policy dialogue has been systematic and impactful in the 
absence of a specific policy agenda, clear mechanisms 
for follow-up, and documentation. This links back to 
whether commitments on policy dialogue on youth 
employment have been made in CSPs.
In addition, the Bank has produced a series of reports 
sharing research and evidence through its Economic 
and Sector Work (ESW) publications. There are 
examples where operational research and market 
assessments have been used in the design of high 
employment projects and other innovative programs. 
However, the evaluation found no information on how 
the broader knowledge products such as the African 
Economic Outlook and other research products are 
being used to inform the policy dialogue, reforms, 
and action on youth employment at the country level.
Innovation 
Implementation of all activities under the 
Innovation lever is ongoing but at a lower scale 
and pace than anticipated, thereby delaying the 
likelihood of the achievement of the expected 
results within the Strategy period. The Innovation 
Lab is not yet in a position to be the knowledge 
generation and learning hub to inform scale 
up of workable solutions. The Enabling Youth 
Employment Index/Dashboard has been 
developed but is not yet available for use. 
Flagship programs
Flagship program implementation was found to 
be ongoing but not yet at the scale required to 
deliver the intended results. Assumptions behind 
some of the targets were found not to be backed 
by evidence, reducing the likelihood of their 
achievement. In the course of implementation of 
the Strategy, the initial six flagship programs40 were 
combined to address overlaps in program features, 
leverage existing resources, and to create greater 
synergy. This adaptation was also a response to 
funding shortfalls following the non-realization of the 
Jobs for Youth in Africa Facility (Special Fund), which 
left operations teams to rely on existing traditional 
Bank resources and/or external financing. The 
Facility, if fully mobilized, was expected to provide 
UA 2.4941 billion to support implementation of flagship 
programs through the provision of loans and grants 
to RMCs. The different models are now implemented 
under three flagship programs in a mix of 26 stand-
alone and embedded projects (i.e., the flagship model 
is implemented as a component of a broader youth 
employment project) across 19 countries. These 
include the CfE program pilot, the ENABLE Youth (EY) 
and the Skills Enhancement Zones under the Special 
Agro-Processing Zones (SAPZ) projects. These 
flagships program projects together make up 13% of 
the primary youth employment projects portfolio.
In the absence of resources from the Facility, the 
Bank leveraged agriculture flagship programs (EY 
and SAPZ) and external funding to secure resources 
for implementation. Bank resources for investment 
in EY projects at UA 271 million resulted in a total 
funding of UA 304.92 million. This amount includes 
government counterpart funding of UA 32.3 million 
and UA 1.6 million as co-financing from the 
European Union. SAPZ programs displayed a larger 
leverage effect of almost 100%, with the Bank 
contribution of UA 457.96 million attracting an 
additional co-financing of UA 442.70 million from 
other partners and UA 90.77 million in government 
contributions. The Bank also secured a USD 2 million 
grant from the Rockefeller Foundation to implement 
a CfE pilot program. However, total mobilized 
41
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
resources for the 26 flagship program projects of 
about UA 1.174 billion comes to 47% of the original 
estimated amount required for implementation of 
flagships at scale. 42 All programs embed strong 
private sector engagement provisions in the 
design of demand-led training curriculums, provide 
internship and placement opportunities, co-funding, 
and implementation support. 
Modification of implementation modalities of 
the flagship programs was not accompanied 
by a review of high level Strategy targets. While 
the rationale for combining implementation of the 
different program models appears justified, the 
evaluation found no subsequent discussion on the 
follow-on implications of these changes on youth 
trained and job creation targets. In addition, the lack 
of documentation and the absence of standardized 
frameworks/indicators for measuring results for 
each model makes it difficult to generate information 
on its efficacy, impact, and provide learning that 
could inform scalability. It also weakens the intended 
inter-country comparisons and learning through the 
flagship approach. 
Some development results are available but 
not yet sufficient to draw conclusions on the 
effectiveness and value of specific program 
Table 2: Flagship Program and Project Summary Results
Coding for Employment (CfE) 
implemented in Nigeria, Kenya, 
Senegal, Rwanda, Côte d’Ivoire
Aims to develop premier coding academies, match graduates directly with 
ICT employers. The program intends to train 243,000 youth and create 9 
million jobs
Results: (i) the program has developed different delivery models tailored to different country contexts; (ii) eight out of the targeted 
130 innovation centers of excellence to provide digital training have been established, while two were fully equipped; (iii) trained 
64% (149,795/243,000) of the targeted youth coming from 45 countries. The online option adopted during the COVID-19 outbreak 
enabled the program to reach 130,000 students demonstrating a more cost-effective option for providing digital skills. Up to 73% 
of youth trained who participated in the online survey reported that they would definitely recommend the program to a friend; and 
(iv) less than 1% of the trainees have been linked to a job so far. The drop in job linkage numbers was associated with a reduction 
in recruitment and/or onboarding of interns by businesses and corporate agencies as a result of the pandemic.
Challenges: (i) though some plans exist, funding for continuation and roll out of this program at scale is not yet available;1 and (ii) at 
the current performance the 9 million direct and indirect jobs target even beyond 2025 appears to be unrealistic and unachievable.
ENABLE Youth (Empowering Novel 
Agri-Business-Led Employment) 
with currently six stand-alone; seven 
embedded projects
Aims to help young Africans incubate new larger scale agri-businesses and 
support them in accessing financing for the growth of these businesses 
targeting to train 10,000 unemployed graduates with a projection of creating 
300,000 agribusiness enterprises and generating 1,500,000 jobs. 2 
Results achieved by ongoing projects: (i) trained 4,486 agripreneurs (including 1,555 women and 1,518 youth); (ii) supported 
the establishment of 1,358 agribusinesses out of the targeted 300,000 enterprises; and (iii) created about 10,892 jobs. Various 
approaches for financing youth led enterprises (grants, loans, de-risking facilities) provide opportunities for learning. However, delays in 
setting up risk-sharing facilities and reaching agreements with financial intermediaries are hindering the timely provision of finance.
Other challenges/weaknesses: (i) delays in construction of agricultural infrastructure and youth incubation/ training centers; 
(ii) slow rate of uptake of EY models due to funding constraints and interest from RMCs; (iii) inadequate systems for estimating 
targets and tracking core data on enterprise development and performance data, as well as job impact created; and (iv) 
inadequate resources (staffing and funding for monitoring limits more efficient coordination, standardization and quality of program 
monitoring and fostering joint learning).
Skills Enhancement Zones under 
Special Agro-Processing Zones (SAPZ) 
Builds capacities of youth farmers and youth led enterprises/startups and other 
stakeholders to access and optimize economic opportunities across the value 
chain in targeted agro industrial zones across 11 countries.
Results: By December 2021, the Bank had approved 12 SAPZ projects that are expected to create 820,000 jobs and train 
up to 54,900 persons. 3 However, at the time of the evaluation, there was insufficient information available on the progress of 
these projects to determine the results and effectiveness of this flagship program.
1 Currently integrated in the Nigeria - Investment in Digital and Creative Enterprises (I-DICE).
2 These targets are extracted from the ENABLE Youth program voucher. It was difficult to derive targets from existing appraisal reports due to differences in indicators and availability of data across the projects.
3 The exact number of the youth benefiting from jobs and training is not evident as not all projects provide disaggregated information.
Source: Project Appraisal Reports, Implementation Performance Reports and County Missions.
42  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
models. The level of adoption and implementation 
of all three flagship programs is still low. The CfE 
pilot program was found to be promising and has 
demonstrated adaptability but is unlikely to achieve 
its targets under the current design, planning, and 
financing arrangements. The assumptions on creating 
9 million direct and indirect jobs are not supported by 
evidence. ENABLE Youth embraces a multi-pronged 
approach to address several constraints to youth 
employment but is struggling with a lower-than-
expected adoption by RMCs. Existing projects have 
so far registered minimal results in establishing a 
sizable number of the youth-led enterprises needed 
to develop and sustain job creation (see summaries 
on results in Table  2). In addition, there is no 
evidence of a systematic process for assessing and 
refining the flagship models, thereby compromising 
feedback on individual program model performance 
and the extent of scalability across different contexts. 
Generally, the adoption of program models was 
found to be slow, meaning that they are not yet being 
implemented at scale to demonstrate the value of the 
flagship approach. Low demand due to constrained 
financial resources, the COVID-19 pandemic and civil 
strife resulted in a break in implementation of some 
of the activities. Within an environment of constrained 
resources, there is less appetite from RMCs to take on 
loans to fund full flagship programs. Implementation 
experience during the first five years has shown that 
RMCs prefer integrated and customized solutions 
that address multiple constraints to job creation and 
productivity. At this point in time, there is low likelihood 
of creating the target 22 million direct and indirect jobs, 
and the training of an additional 24.2 million youth 
through the flagship program approach, as envisaged 
in the JfYA Strategy, even beyond 2025. 
Innovation Lab
Innovation and Entrepreneurship Lab (the Lab) 
has laid the foundation for entrepreneurial 
eco-system support but has made less progress 
in generating an evidence-base for impactful 
projects and incubating ideas. The Lab was 
established in 2019 with funding from the Fund for 
African Private Sector Assistance, in the framework 
of funding support to the Boost Africa Investment 
Program. At the time of the evaluation, the Lab was 
staffed with six personnel and had mobilized over 
USD 8 million in funding from different sources. 
To date, the Lab is providing, training, mentoring, and 
equipping ESOs, as well as direct support to targeted 
youth entrepreneurs (business development services, 
access to finance, market linkages) as part of its 
eco-system approach. In the period 2020–2021, the 
Lab designed the ENNOVA, an online platform to 
aggregate, connect and enable actors in the African 
entrepreneurship ecosystem. It also acts as a one-stop 
shop for resources developed by the Bank and other 
agencies on entrepreneurship and innovation. However, 
the additional value of the enterprise development 
support provided by the Lab is not evident, as it does 
not demonstrate how it differs and/or leverages similar 
support provided through the flagship program projects, 
other YEI  MDTF-funded activities and primary youth 
employment activities in terms of scope and scale. For 
example, the Southern Africa Regional Development 
and Business Delivery Office is developing another 
digital platform, i.e., the SMEnhancer that also aims 
to link youth/women enterprises to relevant support.43 
The evaluation found that weak coordination of SME 
and enterprise development support is a challenge 
across the Bank and therefore not peculiar to the 
implementation of the JfYA Strategy.44 
The evaluation found that the knowledge 
generation component of the Lab is still nascent. 
As of December 2021, the Lab had completed five 
research activities that have been used by other JfYA 
Strategy components and other Bank departments/
country offices to support evidence-based project 
designs.45 However, the Lab is yet to position and 
equip itself as the Bank’s youth entrepreneurial 
knowledge and learning hub, and this affects its 
ability to implement youth employment initiatives at 
scale. The evaluation found no system in place yet 
for the compilation of knowledge and lessons on 
the Bank’s youth employment interventions and/
or evaluation of the flagship models as envisaged 
under the Strategy. The current design of the Lab 
43
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
does not adequately reflect its role on knowledge 
generation of scalable ideas and assessment of 
the Bank’s own interventions on youth employment 
to identify impactful market-driven solutions. 46 
Despite progress in increasing staff numbers and 
funds mobilization, such resource constraints 
remain a challenge for the Lab.
Enabling Youth Employment Index/Dashboard
The Enabling Youth Employment (EYE) Dashboard is 
developed but not available to RMCs and the public. 
The EYE Dashboard was designed to provide an 
accurate and holistic understanding of the labor-
market situation by measuring youth-employment 
outcomes, as well as the policy and regulatory 
environment for youth employment. The EYE 
Dashboard was initially planned as an index that 
would provide a comparative vision of each country’s 
youth employment landscape and context. It was 
considered that the Index would be used to compare 
country efforts. 
The EYE Dashboard was developed as a collaborative 
effort between different Bank departments and then 
reviewed by technical experts from the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD), Department for International Development, 
(now Foreign, Commonwealth & Development 
Office) and ILO. The Index draws on existing data 
from international organizations such as ILO. The 
first report on the EYE Index and its outcomes was 
launched in 2017 (AfDB, 2017a). The EYE Dashboard 
is housed at https://dataportal.opendataforafrica.
org/eye# but the site was inoperative at the time of 
the evaluation. Discussions with Bank staff revealed 
that plans to grant external access to these data 
were halted due to the outdated nature of labor 
statistics and their diminished relevance in light of 
the impact of the pandemic on the labor market. The 
dashboard would need to be updated and widely 
disseminated (including to RMC governments) if it is 
to be used as a policy dialogue and decision-making 
tool as intended. If updated and available, the EYE 
could also complement the JSMS data on youth 
employment.
Investment
Though only half of the six planned activities 
under the Investment Strategic Pillar are ongoing, 
they were found to be generating necessary 
finance and stimulating private sector investment. 
However, the extent of reach and the impact of 
these interventions on the youth is unknown. 
Under the Investment pillar, the Bank planned to 
undertake six activities: 47 (i) provide guarantees for 
lending to SMEs; (ii) support to student loan finance 
programs; (iii) investment in venture equity funds 
through the Boost Africa Investment Fund; (iv) provide 
lines of credit for on-lending to SMEs; (v) direct 
investment to grow youth centric businesses; and 
(vi) use challenges to incentivize private investment 
in youth employment challenges.
The Bank has increased equity in the Africa 
Guarantee Fund (AGF) towards reducing the 
risks of lending to SMEs. The Bank’s financing 
to the AGF was expected to reduce financing risks 
through guarantees for lending to SMEs. In 2018, 
the Bank increased its equity in the AGF 48 through 
a USD 10 million investment as planned under the 
JfYA Strategy. However, the evaluation found no 
evidence that a Youth Access to Finance program 
that would include, amongst others, the provision of 
technical assistance and partial credit guarantees 
to financial intermediaries for on-lending to young 
entrepreneurs and SMEs was launched as planned. 
Nevertheless, AGF annual reports indicate that, since 
2018, the number of youth-led SMEs receiving credit 
through the guarantees has increased from 12,300 
to 16,800. However, the capital structure of the 
Fund does not allow for ring-fencing of resources to 
funding agencies and therefore attribution of results 
becomes difficult. In addition, the AGF has received 
an additional USD 500,000 under the YEI MDTF to 
provide capacity development services to train and 
mentor youth-led businesses (400 entrepreneurs) in 
Ghana, Nigeria, Mali, Togo, and Zimbabwe to prepare 
44  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
them to access financing from a financial institution. 
This program has suffered implementation and 
reporting delays. 
The planned student loan finance program 
was found to be not feasible within the Bank 
systems. The Bank intended to provide technical 
assistance and loans to financial intermediaries 
to issue loans to tertiary and vocational education 
students to acquire the skills. Interviews with staff 
revealed that this action never materialized due to 
the absence of suitable instruments or products 
within the Bank, i.e., dedicated lines of credit, 
guarantees and equity investments needed to 
finance the student loans. It appeared that planning 
for this activity did not sufficiently reflect a realistic 
understanding of Bank processes and instruments. 
This activity would require country level structuring 
and dedicated partners (e.g., financiers, education 
institutions, employers).
Equity investments in venture capital funds 
through the Boost Africa Investment Program 
were found to be increasing access to capital 
for young entrepreneurs. However, the absence 
of age disaggregated data makes it difficult to 
establish the extent of reach and impact on youth. 
The Boost Africa Investment Program is a partnership 
between the AfDB, the European Investment Bank and 
the European Commission. It aims to expand economic 
opportunities for youth through skills development and 
job creation across SSA, with a focus on investment in 
businesses in the early stages. 
By the time of the evaluation, AfDB had met only 
14% of its targeted investment of EUR 50 million 
in the Boost Africa Investment Program through 
a EUR 7 million investment in the EUR 100 million 
Partech fund that targets technology-oriented 
start-ups and early-stage SMEs with an anticipated 
reach and impact on youth enterprises and jobs. 
Consultations with relevant Bank staff revealed that 
efforts to invest an additional EUR 28.5 million into 
other equity funds was ongoing. This would raise the 
total AfDB investment to 85% following a COVID-19-
related hiatus on equity investments by the Bank. 49 
Additional funding from the European Commission is 
available to de-risk the AfDB investment. 
Despite the strong focus on youth in the Boost Africa 
design document, the implementation team indicated 
that it faces difficulty in enforcing a youth focus in the 
equity funds and in measuring youth outcomes. The 
team explained that, as with other lending institutions, 
fund managers are unlikely to target youth-specific 
business without proven track records and collateral. 
In addition, risk assessment criteria within the Bank 
are already stringent and have never been adapted 
for high-risk population segments which include 
youth. From discussions held with stakeholders 
within the Bank, the evaluation found that increasing 
access to capital for such populations has been 
more successful through the use of dedicated risk-
sharing mechanisms, as is done under Affirmative 
Finance Action for Women in Africa (AFAWA), the 
collaboration with Women Entrepreneurs Finance 
Initiative (WeFi) and green enterprises. In addition, 
commercial entities such as financial intermediaries 
often lack efficient measurement systems to track 
and report on development outcomes, a challenge 
corroborated by both Task Managers and commercial 
banks visited in the course of field missions. At the 
time of this evaluation, there was no information 
available on the level of funding going to youth-led 
businesses, or overall and/or net job creation. The 
Bank’s financial services team expected the youth to 
be the largest beneficiaries, based on the labor force 
demographics and characteristics of enterprises being 
supported. 
The evaluation failed to establish the extent of reach 
and benefit to youth enterprises from lines of credit. 
The JfYA Strategy Implementation Plan anticipated 
that USD 25 million of the USD 125 million of the 
Africa SME Program would be allocated to JfYA 
Strategy implementation to promote lending to youth 
entrepreneurs, including microenterprises and SMEs. 
From stakeholder engagements and document 
reviews, it became clear that the SME Program does 
not have an explicit youth focus, nor has it adapted its 
processes in any way to respond to the JfYA Strategy. 
The SME Program targets SMEs broadly, benefiting all 
45
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
businesses, including youth-led businesses. This was 
validated by banks issuing LoCs that were visited during 
the field visits. The evaluation also found no information 
collected on direct reach and impact on enterprises 
and jobs created for youth. In addition, the ongoing 
development of an online SME reporting system does 
not demonstrate that the Bank will be able to track 
youth-led businesses. Nevertheless, the financial 
services team expressed that youth, as the largest 
demographic, stand to benefit from jobs created arising 
from an expanded and vibrant SME sector.
As indicated in previous sections, the evaluation 
found other primary youth employment projects that 
include components on access to finance for youth 
businesses in the form of training and business 
development, linkage to financial intermediaries 
and provision of loans/credits or guarantees. These 
include the ENABLE Youth, SAPZ, the Innovation 
Lab and other YEI MDTF-funded projects. The Bank 
is conducting feasibility studies on establishing 
country-led Youth Entrepreneurship Investment 
Banks (YEIBs) in 10 countries50. The YEIBs will provide 
a more comprehensive range of financial and non-
financial services tailored for young entrepreneurs 
through the different stages of development of their 
businesses. and enable better access to finance 
and coordination of enterprise support activities for 
young entrepreneurs. It remains to be seen how 
the YEIBs will address the challenges with current 
programs, including the extent of targeting of the 
youth, including those in the informal sectors; and 
the measurement of outcomes.
There is insufficient information to determine 
the level of direct investments to youth-centric 
businesses. The JfYA Strategy stated that the Bank 
would make direct investments of debt or equity 
into enterprises, targeting businesses that have 
high potential for job creation, or those that support 
human capital development. However, the evaluation 
did not receive any information on such investments.
The Challenge mechanism applied by the Bank 
did not incentivize market-based solutions to 
youth employment barriers, as had been planned 
in the JFYA Strategy. The Bank, through the 
Innovation Lab and the ENABLE Youth Program, has 
held four challenge initiatives to support innovation 
and entrepreneurship among youth, awarding prizes to 
110 successful young entrepreneurs. These included 
the AgriPitch Competitions, held in 2018, 2019 and 
2020; and the Africa vs Virus Challenge. While the 
vision of the Strategy was that such challenges would 
address market barriers (supply/demand/linkages) 
directly, the actual prize challenges implemented were 
not aligned to the strategy intentions. These challenges 
rather targeted young entrepreneurs to develop and 
nurture innovations in specific technical areas or 
address value chain barriers. Although the young 
entrepreneurs who won the challenges can grow 
their businesses and hire more people, the designs 
of the challenge prizes in and of themselves are not 
solutions to employment barriers. Nevertheless, these 
competitions provide greater visibility and platforms for 
the youth to develop and showcase their businesses, 
as well as generate employment and innovative ideas 
that can have far-reaching impacts. 
Adequacy of Bank Systems, 
Resources and Operations to Support 
Achievement of Youth Employment 
Outcomes
This section assesses the extent to which the Bank 
provided resources and established systems and 
platforms to enable the implementation of youth 
employment interventions and secure JfYA Strategy 
results. 
Financing
The Bank has mobilized significant levels of 
funding for youth employment operations. 
However, the evaluation found the nature and 
type of funding to be insufficient to finance the 
implementation of some critical elements of the 
Strategy to address youth employment at scale.
46  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
The planned JfYA Facility (Special Fund) 
was not established. The Bank estimated that 
implementation of the JfYA Strategy would cost 
UA 4.1 billion.51 The Jobs for Youth in Africa Facility, 
valued at UA 3.5 billion, was expected to contribute 
85% of the required funding to implement of the 
Strategy alongside other Bank-related funds and 
facilities, and direct co-financing from external 
donors (estimated at UA 347 million) and RMC 
cost-sharing (estimated at UA 274 million). The 
evaluation found that expectations around the level 
of financing and the time required to establish such 
a Facility were overly optimistic and aspirational. 
The expected level of funding for such a Fund could 
also be considered ambitious, when compared with 
similar multi-donor trust funds such as the Africa 
Water Facility that raised only EUR 163 million 
between 2006 and 2020. The evaluation found no 
documentation on a resource mobilization strategy 
to guide the establishment of the Special Fund. 
The Bank did not make any financial allocation/
investment towards the establishment of this 
Special Fund to crowd in other funding from other 
partners and the private sector, as anticipated in 
the Implementation Plan. Overall expectations of 
financing the Strategy’s implementation primarily 
through a Special Fund did not adequately optimize 
Bank systems of funding, country allocations, and 
work programming.
Instead, the Bank established the USD 38.9 million 
YEI  MDTF to mobilize resources from donors to 
support growth of the entrepreneurship ecosystem 
in Africa and to help create jobs for its youth. Being the 
only dedicated JfYA Strategy funding vehicle within 
the Bank, the YEI MDTF has been critical in creating 
enabling environments for youth employment and 
supporting catalytic activities to unlock significant 
employment potentials. With funding from this Trust 
Fund, the Bank has been able to explore innovative 
ideas, including the YEIBs, JSMS and supporting 
the continent’s growth in progressive sectors 
such as digital, “fashionomics” and/or the creative 
sector. However, the resources were not found to 
be commensurate with the ambitious objectives 
of the Fund as the main grant vehicle supporting 
implementation and the scale-up of JfYA Strategy 
interventions, currently active in 11 countries. More 
detailed information on the YEI MDTF is provided in 
a separate Case Study Report. 
Other Bank resources and co-financing have 
come in to play the primary role in facilitating 
implementation of the JfYA Strategy, with 
implications for some interventions. As 
indicated in earlier sections, the Bank invested 
over UA 5.16 billion in the 176 primary youth 
employment projects between 2016 and 2021. 
Other projects worth UA 14.19 billion are also 
contributing to youth employment outcomes. 
The Bank was able to leverage an additional 
UA 2.8 billion from other partners to support 
implementation of the 176 primary projects. Other 
externally mobilized resources have supported 
the CfE pilot phase, facilitated the Innovation Lab, 
and provided equity financing under Boost Africa. 
Though the Bank anticipated to initially rely on its 
traditional lending instruments as the process of 
establishment and resource mobilization for the 
Special Fund was underway, these Bank resources 
and direct co-financing have subsequently become 
the primary source of funding for JfYA Strategy 
implementation, exceeding the initial estimate of 
UA 347 million.
While high levels of funding from across the Bank 
demonstrate broad ownership of the Strategy, 
support the One-Bank approach and increase 
the chances of sustainability of addressing youth 
employment within the Bank, the evaluation found 
that this funding does not sufficiently support some 
elements of the Strategy. The funding for primary 
and secondary youth employment projects, mostly 
in the form of investment lending, 52 has left some 
planned interventions, including capacity building, 
knowledge management, and innovative/piloting 
of new ideas, underfunded. Discussions with 
relevant Bank staff and review of documentation 
revealed that, in the absence of dedicated funding 
as originally envisaged, the Bank has not been 
able to fully implement core components of the 
Strategy. These include staff and RMC capacity-
47
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
building activities, support for project appraisal and 
supervision missions, support for the Innovation 
Lab, and for flagship activities at scale. The location 
of the Jobs team under the AHHD Front Office 
(AHHD.0) also has implications in terms of securing 
and managing a dedicated budget, as it falls under 
the AHHD.0 budget and its needs and priorities 
are considered alongside other critical AHHD.0 
priorities. The evaluation team could not establish 
how much of the estimated UA 31 million for Jobs 
team administrative expenses as earmarked in the 
Implementation Plan has been allocated. The Jobs 
team also considers that this positioning affects 
its ability to source resources from other Bank 
departments, as such activities are viewed as “part 
of’’ the AHHD department, or an AHHD initiative. 
Human resources 
Modifications to the staffing structure and 
numbers were found to have mixed effects on 
the adequacy of human resources to coordinate 
implementation of the Strategy.
The JfYA Strategy provided for a dedicated and 
specialized team to support other departments 
and coordinate implementation at the Bank and 
RMC levels. In the course of implementation, the 
Bank made substantial changes to the staffing 
structure, with mixed effects on the adequacy 
of human resources and its ability to coordinate 
implementation of the Strategy. These changes 
included the introduction of new positions, including 
the JfYA Coordinator position, and changes to 
functions, grade levels and locations of staff within 
the department and based in the regions. 
The Jobs team has played a critical role in different 
phases of design and management of youth 
employment projects as anticipated. The portfolio 
review revealed that the AHHD/Jobs team was 
directly involved in close to 60% of the primary 
youth employment projects, as Task Managers 
(31%) or members of the peer review team (29%). 
The Jobs team are also part of some project 
teams. The review also showed that primary youth 
employment projects benefiting from the expertise 
of AHHD/Jobs team (as Task Manager or peer 
reviewer) achieved effectiveness (i.e., 4.4 months 
compared with 6.1 months) and disbursement 
(2.8 months compared with 4.2 months) faster. 
The evaluation found mixed experiences regarding 
the relocation and/or designation of some of the 
Jobs team members as focal points across the 
five regional offices. In some cases, this resulted 
in more accessible expertise that is enabling better 
integration of youth employment considerations 
across the regional portfolio. However, when this 
role was not structured and formalized as a JfYA 
Strategy regional focal point, the staff member 
was more engaged in developing and managing 
investment projects.
However, at the time of the evaluation, six of the 
original 18 positions were unfilled. The evaluation 
could not confirm whether the staffing structure 
proposed in the Implementation Plan was 
approved. The JfYA Coordinator position and other 
staff positions within the immediate Jobs team 
and YEI MDTF were filled in 2018, over two years 
into the Strategy, impacting the pace of roll-out 
of new initiatives. Discussions held with the Jobs 
team revealed that some job descriptions had 
been altered in terms of function and purpose, 
and some staff had been recruited in departments 
other than AHHD, affecting their availability for 
JfYA-related tasks. Stakeholders consulted across 
the Bank expressed the view that the tasks and 
responsibilities of the filled positions often deviate 
from what is designed, sometimes extending 
beyond the mandate of youth employment. Some of 
the unfilled positions, including that of Investment 
Officer, have affected the Jobs team’s ability 
to influence investments, especially in the NSO 
sector. The evaluation found that only five out of 
99 NSOs53 approved between 2016 and 2021 were 
categorized as primary youth employment projects. 
Moreover, none of the NSO projects were found to 
have benefited from the direct support of the Jobs 
48  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
team or received other support to promote youth 
employment. Discussions with the AFAWA team 
revealed that having dedicated investment officers 
has been critical in enabling them to apply a gender 
lens in investment projects. 
In addition, some critical tasks in the Strategy 
Implementation Plan are not occurring as planned. 
These include the ongoing assessment and 
adjustment of the flagship program models, support 
for capacity development of RMCs, integration of 
youth considerations in LoCs, support to financial 
intermediaries, and strategic research, knowledge 
management and innovation activities within the 
Lab. The evaluation found that this has an effect 
on the Bank’s ability to implement the Strategy 
at scale and sustainability. Specifically, capacity 
to integrate youth employment considerations 
within the Bank and RMCs is not being sufficiently 
developed, knowledge on innovative scalable ideas 
emerging from Bank projects is not generated and 
availed to staff, and financial services programs are 
not being adapted to cater for financing for youth-
led enterprises.
Governance 
Critical governance, advisory and coordination 
structures have not been established to support 
the delivery of a Bank-wide Strategy. 
The JfYA Strategy Implementation Plan provides 
for a governing council and two advisory bodies 
(a Task Force and a Presidential Advisory Council) 
to provide strategic and technical guidance 
in the implementation. The Governing Council 
for the Strategy, composed of the JfYA Facility 
representatives and technical staff, was linked to 
the Special Fund and has therefore never been 
set up. However, a similar governing structure 
of the YEI  MDTF is operational, and stakeholders 
interviewed have expressed satisfaction with its 
decision-making performance.
The evaluation found no apparent mechanism 
for oversight and coordination spanning JfYA 
Strategy implementation across departments of 
the Bank. It also found no evidence that the Task 
Force, a dedicated forum for staff, exists and 
meets bi-monthly as foreseen. These shortcomings 
limit opportunities to share experiences, lessons, 
highlight challenges, and identify and pursue 
collaborative opportunities across the Bank. The 
impact of the absence of such a coordination 
platform is worsened in light of the complex and 
sometimes siloed approach to work planning 
within the Bank. The evaluation found that, while 
a CSP offers more opportunities for integrated 
planning, corporate-level work programs and 
budgets are much more department-specific. 
Apart from the implementation plan prepared in 
2016, the evaluation team did not find another 
Strategy-wide work planning or management tool. 
Gaps in coordination between departments and 
sectors were identified at various levels, limiting 
opportunities for optimizing PBOs, inclusive 
financial services, and private sector development 
activities to address youth interests. 54  
The Presidential Advisory Council, also referred to 
as the Presidential Youth Advisory Group (PYAG) and 
composed of youth55 and civil society organizations, 
was expected to provide diverse input on key 
strategic and implementation issues, assist the 
Jobs team in connecting to the youth, and provide 
guidance and technical assistance as needed. 
However, apart from the initial planning meetings 
in 2018 and participation in selected public events, 
this group has not been very active, especially 
since the COVID-19 pandemic. The evaluation 
found no reports on results of implementation of 
PYAG workplans and attempts to meet with them in 
the course of the evaluation were unsuccessful. In 
the past, there was a dedicated officer to support 
the activities of the PYAG, but this position has not 
been substantively replaced and resourced in light 
of funding constraints. The limited functionality of 
such a committee may have reduced the opportunity 
for greater resource mobilization, advocacy for 
key issues, and placing strategy implementation 
49
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
higher on the Bank’s agenda. This also means that 
the anticipated youth engagement at the higher 
strategy level has not been fully realized.
Monitoring and evaluation 
Despite attempts at integrating youth employment 
considerations in Bank M&E systems, overall JfYA 
Strategy results measurement and monitoring 
was found to be inadequate and not systematic 
enough to inform strategy management and 
continuous learning. Ongoing work on the Jobs 
and Skills Marker System and other Bank-
wide improvements in monitoring systems 
are expected to address some of the current 
challenges.
The JfYA Strategy monitoring and evaluation 
approach is guided by the Bank’s overarching 
approach and systems for M&E. The Strategy 
set out to integrate JfYA indicators into Bank 
performance monitoring systems (i.e., overall Bank 
Group’s Results Measurement Framework (RMF) 
2016–2025, Annual Development Effectiveness 
Review (ADER), the Bank Results Score Card, 
the Executive Dashboard, sector indicators, and 
project results based logical frameworks) alongside 
preparation of regular results briefs and leveraging 
lessons learned into new M&E systems developed 
in the course of strategy implementation.
To date, a few JfYA Strategy impact and outcome 
indicators have been integrated in the corporate 
RMF, and are collected and reported through Bank-
wide systems. These indicators (job creation and 
levels of youth unemployment) are reported in 
the ADER and in the Bank’s annual report. Others 
are supposed to be tracked through the ongoing 
implementation monitoring and self-assessment 
systems at the complex, department, country 
and project levels. However, the evaluation found 
that systematic tracking and reporting across the 
different complexes and projects has not advanced 
as expected,56 due to: (i) burdensome JfYA Strategy 
results framework that required tracking a high 
number of indicators some of which are not directly 
relevant and/or feasible within the Bank; (ii)  the 
absence of a monitoring plan providing standardized 
definitions, systematic collection, aggregation and 
analysis of data across key indicators; (iii) unused 
sector action plans that were supposed to identify 
and track sector specific employment indicators; 
(iv) inadequate human resources; and (v) a general 
lack of clarity in roles and responsibilities for 
monitoring Bank-wide strategies. Data are available 
for only 32% of the 40 indicators.
Although the JfYA Strategy is one of the Presidential 
Initiatives tracked regularly by the Cabinet, none of 
the key jobs’ indicators are included in the delivery 
dashboard as planned, which limit Bank-wide 
accountability on job creation. In comparison, 
climate change and gender indicators are available 
on this dashboard and tracked across the different 
complexes. 
Similar monitoring challenges exist at the project 
level and other components of the JfYA portfolio, 
including the YEI  MDTF and the Innovation Lab. 
From the case studies, Project Implementation 
Units reported that their M&E capacity is over-
stretched and not equipped to systematically 
track job creation and other indicators. Private 
sector partners including commercial banks also 
expressed difficulties in collecting jobs and other 
outcome data due to capacity constraints and 
the unwillingness of enterprises to disclose some 
information for fear of tax implications.
Though the Bank has now established 
mechanisms for collecting data on (estimates 
of) both direct and indirect jobs, data quality 
weaknesses pose significant limitations to 
the availability of information, its use and 
assessment of the Bank’s progress in creating 
jobs. 
Direct jobs: The evaluation encountered mixed 
understanding on approaches to measuring 
50  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
jobs, worsened by inadequate and/or outdated 
documentation on indicator definitions and 
approaches. Data currently reported at the corporate 
level are based on planned rather than actual jobs 
created, without attention to quality, type and net/
additional jobs, all of which limit the ability to 
demonstrate actual Bank performance in job creation. 
The evaluation also found a likelihood of under-
reporting at the corporate level due to capturing 
results from projects not registered in the SAP and 
missed reporting. Disaggregation for gender and/
or age, even when required, is inconsistent. Apart 
from supervision missions, verification and quality 
assurance of project level data could be improved 
as the evaluation found cases of miscalculations. 
It is worth noting that difficulty in collecting data 
on direct jobs actually created is not unique to 
the Bank. Country missions and discussions with 
project managers revealed significant challenges in 
measuring jobs at the project level due to capacity 
constraints, as well as a lack of sufficient guidance 
and harmonized indicator definitions. Discussions 
with selected development finance institutions, 
revealed that most of them do not conduct primary 
data collection on the number of direct jobs created, 
given the resource-intensity of this exercise. 
Indirect Jobs: Since 2020, the Bank has adopted 
the Joint Impact Model (JIM) to estimate indirect 
jobs,57 a major development towards improving 
measurement of development impacts. By capturing 
the supply chain, induced, and forward effect on jobs, 
the JIM allows a more comprehensive tracking of the 
employment effect of the Bank’s funding. The Bank 
now has data on indirect jobs going back to 2016, 
andis working on providing a more complete set of 
information on indirect jobs created as a result of 
enabling impacts in more sectors (currently available 
for power and financial services), and estimates of 
project-level indirect jobs. 
On a positive note, work started in late 2022 to 
develop and integrate standard indicators as part of 
the Management response to the IDEV evaluation 
of the Bank’s RMF will support better alignment 
and reporting on cross-cutting employment 
indicators. This will be complemented by the JSMS 
roll-out and operationalization of the Bank-wide 
online Results Reporting System launched in 2021, 
revised guidance, and resumed training sessions 
on project design and M&E for operations staff by 
SNDR to stimulate improvements in monitoring 
practices.
Sustainability
The evaluation found the JfYA Strategy design 
strong on sustainability, given its attention to 
building institutional capacity and an enabling 
environment, and on developing entrepreneurship 
and strategic partnerships for addressing youth 
employment concerns. Consequently, there is 
a high likelihood of sustainability of the results 
of ongoing activities. The greatest risks to 
sustainability are related to implementation gaps 
that could affect the achievement of the required 
institutional capacity, a limited focus on youth 
beneficiaries, and exogenous factors that affect 
overall macroeconomic stability and resilience.
The first five years of the Strategy have focused 
on putting in place the systems and processes 
necessary for addressing youth employment over 
the coming decades. The mid-term evaluation 
has assessed the design considerations and the 
likelihood of the sustainability of the project results 
achieved so far. 
Design considerations that increase 
the likelihood of sustainability
The evaluation found that the design of 
the JfYA Strategy embedded significant 
considerations to support sustainability. The 
Strategy’s eco-system approach, and its focus 
on the private sector and capacity building, if 
implemented well, increases the likelihood of 
sustainability.
51
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Strengthening capacity at the Bank and in 
RMCs supports scale and sustainability of youth 
employment. The JfYA Strategy’s focus on greater 
incorporation of youth employment considerations 
into all projects, staff competencies, policies, 
processes, and systems within the Bank and RMCs 
lays a firm foundation for sustainability. Integration 
efforts are expected to enhance institutional 
and financial capacity thereby equipping Bank 
and RMCs with the necessary frameworks and 
resources to improve employment on the continent 
in the coming decades. 
The eco-system approach to employment 
creation that underpins the JfYA Strategy increases 
the likelihood of sustainability of youth employment 
outcomes by addressing multiple barriers, 
supporting multi-stakeholder engagement, and 
promoting local solutions. The strong focus on 
developing youth entrepreneurship alongside skills 
development supports both job creation potential 
and improves employability. 
Strong focus on the private sector was found 
to be technically sound and increases the 
likelihood of success and the sustainability 
of the results achieved given their role in 
job creation. JfYA projects were found to be 
engaging and leveraging the private sector to 
close the loop between labor supply and market 
needs, generate additional financing, support 
co-creation opportunities, and the delivery of more 
sustainable solutions. For example, linkages have 
been developed between training institutes/TVET 
schools and private sector employers across the 
ENABLE, SAPZ projects, or TVET schools in Kenya 
requiring private sector input in curriculum design. 
Partnership with global players such as Microsoft 
and LinkedIn in to build digital skills increase the 
employability of youth. Investments in equity funds 
that focus on the youth, as for example under Boost 
Africa, have the potential to increase access to 
finance for youth-led enterprises.
Building the local eco-system capacity: Youth 
employment interventions being implemented 
were found to be building capacity to support 
enterprise development and employment, thereby 
increasing the likelihood of sustainability. The 
Innovation Lab, ENABLE and SAPZ projects 
program models are strengthening training 
centers, incubation centers, aggregators, and 
TVET institutions to train and equip young 
entrepreneurs. For example, country field visits 
to Malawi revealed that the Jobs for Youth Africa 
project has expanded the capacity of community 
training centers and supported the development 
of several key enabling policies to improve 
greater access and quality of skills development 
and business development services for young 
entrepreneurs. Another project also facilitated the 
establishment of the first risk-sharing facility in 
Malawi to improve access to finance for the youth. 
The likelihood of sustainability is even greater 
where capacity building has been combined 
with enabling policy. Examples are the business 
incubation strategy that supports accreditation 
of incubation centers and BDS providers in 
Malawi, the MSME policy in Kenya that supports 
targeted activities for youth entrepreneurship 
within MSMEs, and the TVET policy in Kenya that 
requires collaboration between TVET institutions 
and private sector organizations in designing 
training curriculums. The evaluation found that 
CfE programs were building the infrastructural 
and technical capacity of local universities/
training institutes for continued provision of digital 
skills within the countries.
Risks to Sustainability
Inadequate implementation of key elements is 
one of the major risks to sustainability of JfYA 
Strategy results. To date, uneven progress in 
developing necessary institutional capacity 
diminishes the likelihood of sustainability.  
Critical activities in building Bank staff capacity, 
including technical guidance and assistance, and 
systematic monitoring, is affecting the extent of 
optimization of the Bank’s resources for addressing 
youth employment. Limited implementation 
of similar capacity development efforts and 
52  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
labor-market information support at the RMC level 
are impediments to achieving sustainable progress 
on addressing youth employment. 
Inadequate resources may limit the scale 
and sustainability of promising interventions 
started under the JfYA Strategy. For instance, 
the CfE flagship, with iterations and pivots, is 
demonstrating fairly strong performance with the 
donor funding received. Apart from expectations 
of individual projects integrating a component(s) 
of the CfE program, 58 the evaluation found no clear 
plan for the ongoing financial support of CfE after 
the end of the Rockefeller grant funding. A second 
example of this type of innovative project is the 
Souk at Tanmia project in North Africa, funded 
by a multi-donor trust fund, which demonstrated 
strong evidence of employability and job creation. 
However, it has no onward funding at the 
conclusion of the existing donor funding period. 
Already the challenges to internally generating 
funding, both within the Bank and RMCs to support 
youth employment initiatives, demonstrate that 
sustained programing needs to be funded from 
other sources. 
Country ownership. There was evidence that 
projects reviewed as part of the country case 
studies have been designed and implemented in 
collaboration with the RMCs/local partner institutions 
directly responding to the needs identified in the 
local context. Projects are implemented via local 
institutions and respond to country conditions. 
Where poor country engagement was observed, it 
resulted in low support and weak program designs. 
This was the case for some of the projects in DRC 
where it was reported that planning was mainly 
carried out by AfDB experts or task members, 
resulting in a limited understanding of the youth 
employment context in the country. Projects were 
aligned with government programs but failed to 
recognize certain barriers faced by the youth. 
Similarly, pre-designed flagship program models 
have met with mixed success, as RMCs have 
preferred to customize and adapt them according 
to their needs and resources.
Youth engagement. Generally, the evaluation 
found lower-than-expected levels of engagement of 
the youth in project processes across the five case 
study countries. There was stronger engagement of 
the youth in implementation, as beneficiaries and 
sometimes as facilitators/service providers than 
other phases of the project cycle, including design 
and appraisal. In Malawi, the youth were engaged 
as facilitators/community trainers and are also 
represented on a national committee to oversee 
the risk-sharing facility under the Agricultural 
Infrastructure and Youth in Agribusiness Project   
to advocate for youth interests. However, where 
inadequate engagement has occurred, coupled 
with incidences of poor communication and 
implementation delays, as demonstrated in the 
Kenya ENABLE Youth project, the youth were more 
demotivated and reported feeling disenfranchised. 
Low engagement will likely affect long-term 
outcomes and participation. 
Access to finance for enterprises. Inadequate 
actions to address barriers to financing for 
youth-led enterprises and overall financing 
for SMEs will compromise the creation and 
sustainability of jobs. Across two of the five case 
study countries, significant implementation delays 
and/or cancellations of financing options under 
ongoing primary youth employment projects with 
access to finance components have highlighted 
this concern. Importantly, there is currently 
insufficient information from mainstream financial 
services projects on youth-led enterprises that 
have benefited from financial services projects 
or even how these services are being adapted to 
address specific barriers faced by the youth (see 
the previous sub-section on Investments). Again, 
the evaluation found the YEIBs to be a promising 
opportunity to improve opportunities for the 
financing of youth enterprises. An increase in equity 
funding also provides greater opportunities.
Exogenous risks to sustainability. In addition to 
the above risks to sustainability within the Bank’s 
control, there remain exogenous macroeconomic 
risks, such as low economic growth (expected to 
53
Findings
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
remain at 4.1% in 2023), political instability, and 
shifts in global competitiveness that affect general 
economic growth and impact the structural 
transformation efforts needed to generate 
jobs. Over the next few years, the impact of the 
environment and climate change is expected 
to increase impacts on health and create an 
upsurge in humanitarian emergencies. Similarly, 
reductions in funding for entrepreneurship, in 
particular for youth entrepreneurship, continue to 
be a challenge for the Bank and other financial 
institutions. 

55
Conclusions, Lessons and Recommendations
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Conclusions, Lessons and 
Recommendations
Conclusions
A productive and engaged youth population 
is at the core of social and economic 
transformation on the African continent.  
Failure to address youth constraints to decent 
employment and engagement in decision-making 
can have devastating consequences on economic 
development, and social and political stability 
within countries and across borders. Decades of 
jobless growth in Africa have limited economic 
opportunities for all, especially the youth. Africa’s 
youth are more often stuck in low-paying jobs in 
the informal sector. They face both over-skilling 
and under-skilling challenges, which affect their 
ability to get decent paying jobs. Survival of youth-
led enterprises is low as they struggle to access 
finance and business development services. 
The COVID-19 pandemic, climate change, and 
geo-political events have worsened this situation 
by weakening macroeconomic fundamentals, job 
creation potential, and human development.
The JfYA Strategy was found to be relevant 
and serves to position the Bank to address 
youth employment across the continent, in 
complement with other Bank strategies.  
However, the changing economic growth 
context materialization of risks and other design 
shortcomings were found to undermine the 
overall validity of Theory of Change and realism 
of set targets. In terms of coherence, the 
strategy aligns well with corporate strategies, 
as well as development priorities of RMCs and 
other development partners. Though the Bank 
has mobilized significant financial resources 
to support the implementation of JfYA Strategy 
intentions, there have also been shortfalls in 
funding for some critical areas. Human resources 
and management systems expected to support 
the implementation of the JfYA as a Bank-wide 
strategy have not materialized as planned, with 
mixed effects on Strategy implementation.
Bank interventions were found to be creating 
jobs and equipping youth for employment 
but actual progress towards achievement of 
Strategy results and outcomes was difficult 
to establish. The Bank has registered mixed 
progress in the implementation of the key 
actions of the Strategy. In the course of 
implementation, the Bank has demonstrated 
flexibility in adapting, iterating, and changing 
actions and approaches to align the Strategy better 
with the Bank’s systems and existing resources 
and to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic and 
other external shifts that occurred during the 
evaluation period. While there is evidence of 
improved Integration of youth employment into 
operations, this is not yet sufficient at the systems 
level. The evaluation found that the inadequate 
systemic integration has manifested in the 
form of lost opportunities for addressing youth 
employment issues, and difficulty in standardizing 
monitoring and measurement of youth employment 
outcomes across the entire Bank portfolio. The 
Strategy emphasized the need for collection and 
dissemination of evidence of what works, but 
this is not yet happening systematically and this 
undermines the opportunities for demonstrating 
value and catalyzing implementation at scale 
within and across countries. It also prevents 
learning and activity adaptation and revision. 
The evaluation found that ongoing actions in 
development of the JSMS, review of the project 
classification and other monitoring enhancements 
56  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
all provide an opportunity to systemically adapt 
and integrate jobs and skills development in the 
coming years.
The JfYA Strategy design was found to be 
strong on sustainability given its eco-system 
approach, its attention to building institutional 
capacity and an enabling environment, 
and developing entrepreneurship and 
strategic partnerships for addressing youth 
employment concerns. The most significant 
risks to sustainability are related to implementation 
gaps that could affect the achievement of the 
required institutional capacity, inadequate focus 
on youth beneficiaries, limited interventions to 
sustainably address barriers to financing for 
youth-led enterprises and overall financing for 
SMEs, and exogenous factors that affect overall 
macroeconomic stability and resilience. 
Lessons
1. Over-optimistic expectations around 
fundamental elements of a strategy, such 
as dedicated financing through a Special 
Fund, human resource allocation, and the 
establishment of required systems, can 
undermine progress. While the Strategy 
strived to be innovative, ambitious, and to 
implement at scale, initiatives that require new 
operational structures and systems, expertise 
and skills, and additional resources require 
more feasibility analysis, upfront commitment, 
and attention to risk mitigation. Although the 
evaluation found several examples of Bank 
adaptations to some of these shortcomings, 
risk mitigation surveillance to trigger required 
Management action should have been 
stronger. In the absence of sufficient finance, 
standardized monitoring and evaluation 
systems, the value of the flagship approach 
to scale up proven models seems to have 
diminished over time. In addition, some 
aspects of the Strategy did not align well 
and were not feasible within standard Bank 
operations and budgeting processes. Thorough 
analysis of the feasibility of the Strategy 
and its key interventions, securing upfront 
commitments, ongoing risk surveillance, and 
continuous monitoring of innovative elements 
are an essential part of strategy design and 
management processes. 
2. Governance structures supported by 
appropriate management tools, resources, 
and authority are essential for systematic 
coordination and oversight of Bank-wide 
strategies such as the JfYA Strategy. Such 
structures are critical for a cross-cutting 
strategy to review progress, mobilize joint 
action to address bottlenecks, and leverage 
opportunities and synergies. While the Jobs 
team is expected to oversee and coordinate 
implementation of JfYA Strategy activities 
implemented across different departments, it 
does not have the tools, platforms, resources, 
and authority to effectively do this. Bank 
planning and monitoring systems were not 
sufficient to enable ongoing coordination, 
resource mobilization, and reporting. The 
Task Force meant to bring together staff from 
across different departments has not been 
established. Increasingly, Jobs team staff 
are over-stretched as they handle multiple 
activities and increasingly take on project 
management roles. 
3. The right incentives paired with 
accountability can strongly advance 
successful integration of employment 
considerations across the Bank. Effective 
integration of youth employment (or broad 
employment) within the Bank would mean 
that programs across the Bank consider 
and adequately leverage and integrate 
opportunities for youth employment from the 
onset. Integration of youth employment in IFAD 
was reported to be more successful when 
combined with incentives and accountability 
structures within the institution. Within the 
AfDB, the gender marker system has enabled 
57
Conclusions, Lessons and Recommendations
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
better integration of gender across the Bank. 
In addition, the tracking of gender and climate 
change integration indicators in the Bank RMF 
and delivery dashboard raises the profile and 
accountability across different complexes.
4. Skills development, when coupled with 
access to finance and non-financial support, 
is key to boosting employability and youth 
entrepreneurship. Skills development is 
essential, but in itself it is insufficient to create 
jobs. It is therefore important to be realistic 
about job outcomes job outcomes from 
training and skills development activities. Firm 
creation and expansion create jobs, and this is 
where the intense focus on jobs targets and 
monitoring can be directed. 
5. Small-size grants can be effective in 
unlocking catalytic opportunities. In the case 
of the JfYA Strategy, broadly, what has worked 
well is the shift towards catalytic efforts to 
unlock funding and support the achievement of 
the broader Strategy goals. Specifically, the Bank 
leveraged the USD 38.9 million in YEI  MDTF 
funding to conduct feasibility and research 
studies of catalytic initiatives and financing of 
other innovative activities that otherwise may 
not have been funded. Evidence generated from 
these analytic studies has been used to unlock 
significant funding for scaled job creation from 
both internal Bank funds and other actors, 
including the private sector. The Fund has 
also been useful in facilitating other innovative 
activities. Some of these activities are now being 
replicated in countries and other regions. 
Recommendations
IDEV makes the following recommendations: 
1. Update the Strategy and its implementation 
plan based on current circumstances and 
resources. Bank Management is specifically 
advised to:
 ■ Update the Theory of Change, the 
Implementation Plan, and the targets 
for the remaining period of the Strategy, 
based on the findings from the mid-term 
evaluation, current realities (including Bank 
systems, the new AfDB Ten-Year Strategy 
under development, country specificities, 
and changes in the macroeconomic 
environment), and available resources. 
 ■ Review and update the risk mitigation 
measures and surveillance plans to guide 
necessary adjustments to the Strategy and 
the Implementation Plan.
2. Strengthen Results Measurement and 
Learning. The Bank is advised to:
 ■ Advance implementation of the Jobs 
and Skills Marker System along with the 
necessary resources, technical assistance, 
and staff training to improve the quality, 
implementation, and measurement of youth 
employment outcomes across the Bank. 
 ■ Improve the quality and consistency of data 
measuring actually created jobs for youth 
across the Bank’s operations, and enhancing 
its ability to better demonstrate the results of 
the JfYA Strategy. 
 ■ Consider adopting a jobs indicator among 
the Bank’s KPIs to provide incentives and 
accountability for job creation, shared across 
Bank departments.
 ■ Review the JfYA Strategy’s RMF, including 
considering reducing the existing 
number of indicators for delivering youth 
employment across the Bank, with a focus 
on relevance, feasibility, and utility. The 
framework should be accompanied by 
clear indicator definitions, measurement 
approaches, annual targets, clear roles 
and responsibilities, reporting procedures, 
and resource requirements to support 
data availability. The framework could 
also consider indicators of job quality and 
decent work, in line with building more 
resilient employment. 
58  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report
 ■ Capacitate the Innovation Lab to take on its 
intended core role of generating evidence 
on and becoming the Bank’s center of 
excellence on youth employment, and 
entrepreneurship with a view to coordinating 
learning and knowledge exchange, working 
hand in hand with regional offices, research, 
and other departments in the Bank, and 
other development partners.
3. Continue to mobilize resources to support 
catalytic activities and high employment-
creating projects.  
The Bank is advised to expand the scale 
and scope of the YEI  MDTF, in line with the 
new Trust Fund Policy 2021, to continue its 
catalytic work including feasibility studies, 
research and project assessments, and seed 
financing for innovative activities that will 
unlock funds for implementing job creation at 
scale.
4. Strengthen leadership and coordination 
of youth employment across Bank 
departments, building on existing resources 
and considering other Bank priorities.  
This can include reviewing the structure, 
positioning, functions, and resourcing of the 
JfYA team to provide leadership in the area of 
youth employment across the Bank. 
Annexes
Annex 1: Evaluation Matrix 60
Annex 2: Elaborated JfYA Strategy Theory of Change 64
Annex 3: Portfolio Review Tables 66
Annex 4: Flagship Program Models and Projects 68
References 69
Endnotes 73
 Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report60
Annex 1: Evaluation Matrix
Key Questions Sub-questions/What to look for Indicators/Measures Data/Information Sources/ 
Data Collection Methods
1. How well has the JfYA Strategy positioned the Bank to contribute to improving employment outcomes of youth in Africa? (Relevance and 
Coherence)
1.1. To what extent are 
the Theory of Change, 
underlying assumptions 
and risks relevant and 
valid in the remaining 
strategy period and are 
any changes needed to 
achieve the expected 
results?
 ❙ Is the current Theory of Change known, 
understood and currently used?
 ❙ Are assumptions and risks still valid and does 
this affect the achievement of results?
 ❙ What things have changed in the 
operational context? How do they affect 
the implementation of JfYA strategy and 
achievement of intended targets?
 ❙ Any identified gaps / opportunities in the 
Theory of Change needed to support the 
achievement of the objectives?
 ❙ How did the COVID-19 pandemic affect the 
Theory of Change, the underlying assumptions, 
and the anticipated risks?
 ❙ Gaps in the Theory of Change,
 ❙ Extent to which the Theory of 
Change is valid and relevant for the 
current context,
 ❙ Reflection on the current youth 
employment context in 2022.
 ❙ Review of JfYA Strategy 
documents and 
implementation plan
 ❙ Review of ESWs and 
other relevant research 
and evaluations on youth 
employment issues in Africa
 ❙ Key informant interviews with 
Bank staff, i.e., JfYA Strategy 
implementation team, 
regional offices
 ❙ Country case studies
 ❙ Review of other contextual 
information and up-to-
date research on youth 
employment issues
1.2. Are intervention 
areas and 
implementation 
approaches suited to 
the continent’s needs 
in a changing global 
context?
 ❙ How does the JfYA Strategy address 
constraints, strengths, opportunities and 
challenges to youth unemployment in Africa 
across different contexts? 
 ❙ How does the JfYA Strategy consider the 
different challenges and experiences faced by 
male and female youth? How has this evolved 
since the beginning of the Strategy?
 ❙ To what extent do the strategic levers and the 
respective activities address constraints and 
opportunities for employment creation?
 ❙ To what extent have interventions been 
adapted to respond to changes in the 
operating context? What has enabled this 
adaptive management?
 ❙ How well did the Bank through the JfYA 
Strategy respond to emerging issues from the 
COVID-19 pandemic?
 ❙ Have the principles identified as enabling 
factors through lessons learned under each 
of the strategic intervention areas (pillars) for 
implementation been incorporated?
 ❙ Perceptions on relevance 
and appropriateness of JfYA 
Strategy intervention areas and 
implementation approaches;
 ❙ Proportion of sampled JfYA 
projects that score satisfactory on 
relevance (disaggregated by sex, 
sector, region, country context);
 ❙ Proportion of sampled JfYA projects 
that have a gender focus/ target 
male/female youth differently;
 ❙ Extent to which JfYA Strategy 
aligns with the youth and RMC 
priorities, continental and global 
aspirations; and
 ❙ Extent to which JfYA Strategy 
interventions and implementation 
has responded to the COVID-19 
pandemic and other changes in the 
operating environment.
 ❙ Review of ESWs and 
other relevant research 
and evaluations on youth 
employment issues in Africa
 ❙ Country case studies
 ❙ Interviews with Bank staff, 
youth, partners
 ❙ Online survey
1.3. How does the 
JfYA Strategy elevate 
and amplify similar 
strategies of the 
RMCs and other key 
development partners?
 ❙ How have the strategic levers, which 
emphasize partnerships, been activated in 
implementation?
 ❙ What are areas of convergence, divergence 
and/or duplication with other agency youth 
employment and entrepreneurship programs 
(goals, targets, systems and structures, 
implementation approaches)?
 ❙ Areas of leverage from the AfDB to 
other partner agencies; and 
 ❙ Extent to alignment of JfYA 
Strategy to RMC policies and 
priorities.
 ❙ Review of JfYA against 
agency strategies, global and 
continental aspirations
 ❙ Key informant interviews 
with Bank staff, RMCs, 
counterpart MDBs, ILO, IFIs 
and bilateral agencies
 ❙ Policy reviews and 
benchmarking study
 ❙ Case studies
61
Annexes
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Key Questions Sub-questions/What to look for Indicators/Measures Data/Information Sources/ 
Data Collection Methods
1.4. To what extent 
does the JfYA 
Strategy add value 
and elevate effort and 
activities with other 
Bank strategies and 
policies?
 ❙ How does the JfYA Strategy align with other 
High-5 and cross-cutting strategies?
 ❙ What are the synergies and interlinkages 
between the JfYA Strategy, and other 
interventions carried out by the AfDB?
 ❙ What is the value added of the JfYA Strategy 
to other policies and strategies?
 ❙ Areas of alignment and synergy;
 ❙ Areas of added value; and 
 ❙ Areas of misalignment or lost 
opportunities.
 ❙ Review of the Bank’s TYS, 
human capital strategy, 
High-5 strategies, private 
sector, financial services, 
fragility and resilience, 
gender, economic 
governance
 ❙ Interviews with Bank 
Management and 
implementing department 
staff
1.5. Are Bank 
resources, systems 
and structures 
adequate to support 
the achievement of 
intended results?
 ❙ What systems and structures are available to 
support JfYA Strategy implementation?
 ❙ What are the strengths and weaknesses of 
planning, financing, monitoring & evaluation 
and management systems?
 ❙ How has the availability, or lack, and 
strengths and weaknesses, affected the 
delivery of the strategy?
 ❙ Are financial resources and systems sufficient 
to support JfYA Strategy implementation? 
What are the gaps?
 ❙ Are human resources adequate in terms of 
numbers and skills mix?
 ❙ Has the available resourcing been able to 
support the implementation plan as originally 
anticipated?
 ❙ To what extent do the Bank’s quality 
assurance process (QaE and exit) support 
the integration of youth entrepreneurship 
and employment issues across all Bank 
operations?
 ❙ How well has the Bank used its 
comparative advantage to advance strategy 
implementation and/or results?
 ❙ Extent to which planning, 
management, monitoring, and 
supervision, financing and quality 
assurance tools support the 
achievement of JfYA Strategy 
aspirations;
 ❙ Extent to which the PYAG is 
providing appropriate input in 
Strategy implementation;
 ❙ Extent to which the JIM provides 
data that meet quality standards 
(validity, reliability, timeliness, 
precision, integrity); and
 ❙ Required staffing and budget 
compared with work plan and 
tasks expected.
 ❙ Interviews and discussions 
with Jobs team, 
implementation departments 
and regional staff; 
Resource Mobilization and 
Partnerships Department, 
PYAG
 ❙ Review of implementation 
plans, manuals, and 
progress reports
 ❙ Assessment of JfYA 
Strategy results framework, 
monitoring tools and outputs
 ❙ Assessment of planning and 
quality assurance tools and 
the use thereof;
 ❙ Review of financial reports
 ❙ Review of JIM manuals, 
database and tools
 ❙ Review of past evaluations 
on self-assurance systems 
and plans
1.6. Are partnerships 
and collaboration 
mechanisms (i.e., both 
internal and external) 
contributing to the 
achievement of results, 
operating within the 
One-Bank Approach?
 ❙ How well has the One-Bank Approach been 
applied in implementation of the strategy 
so far?
 ❙ How have internal and external partnerships 
contributed to the results at different levels?
 ❙ What are challenges, opportunities and 
recommendations for improvement?
 ❙ Extent to which internal and 
external partnerships are affecting 
the achievement of progress and 
results;
 ❙ Perceptions on the Bank and RMC 
partnership on youth employment; 
and
 ❙ Enabling factors and best 
practices in partnership and 
collaboration.
 ❙ Key informant interviews 
with Bank staff
 ❙ Key informant interviews 
with RMCs and partner 
agencies
 Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report62
Key Questions Sub-questions/What to look for Indicators/Measures Data/Information Sources/ 
Data Collection Methods
2. Is JfYA Strategy implementation contributing to improvements in youth employment in RMCs? (Effectiveness and Efficiency)
2.1. Are the Strategy 
interventions and 
actions delivering the 
intended outputs and 
outcomes?
 ❙ What is the status of the implementation 
of different interventions and projects and 
initiatives?
 ❙ What has been achieved? What has 
progressed well?
 ❙ What are the observable differences in the 
Bank, RMCs, private sector partners, and 
other partners as a result of the JfYA Strategy, 
the strategic levers and the implementation 
thereof?
 ❙ Which results are unlikely to be achieved? 
Why not?
 ❙ Does the JfYA Strategy, its strategic levers, 
and the various activities, appear to be on 
track to deliver the expected outcomes 
sustainably within the next five years?
 ❙ # of implementation plan activities 
on track;
 ❙ # of completed projects that 
scored satisfactory on the 
effectiveness criteria;
 ❙ # of RMF indicators registering 
progress (disaggregated by 
gender);
 ❙ Level of Bank staff knowledge 
and application of JfYA Strategy 
implementation approach;
 ❙ Youth perceptions (male and 
female) of the effectiveness of 
interventions;
 ❙ # of projects that have a gender 
focus, or have accounted for 
targeting male/female youth in 
different ways; 
 ❙ # of knowledge products and other 
ESWs produced and used; and 
 ❙ Extent to which JfYA Strategy 
implementation is meeting ADF-14 
and 15 commitments.
 ❙ Case studies
 ❙ Document review – briefing 
reports, flagship reports, 
Trust Fund annual reports, 
ADERs, Project completion 
reports and project mid-term 
review reports, PCRs/XSRENs
 ❙ Project review
 ❙ Indicator analysis
 ❙ Interviews and discussions
2.2. What key factors 
have influenced 
the achievement or 
non-achievement of 
intended outputs and 
outcomes?
 ❙ What internal and external factors are 
enabling the achievement of intended 
outcomes? What factors are hindering the 
achievement of outcomes? How might these 
be altered for greater success in the next 
five years?
 ❙ How did the involvement of the youth 
at different points in the design and 
implementation contribute to the effectiveness 
and probable sustainability of the activities?
 ❙ How did the COVID-19 pandemic affect the 
anticipated implementation plan, various 
activities within the Bank, within the RMCs 
and in the other partner stakeholders?
 ❙ List of contributing and hindering 
factors (disaggregated across 
intervention areas, target groups 
(including male/female youth), and 
country contexts).
 ❙ Case studies
 ❙ Document review – briefing 
reports, flagship reports, 
Trust Fund annual reports, 
ADERs, Project Completion 
Reports and project mid-
term review reports, PCRs/
XSRENs
 ❙ Project review
 ❙ Interviews
2.3. What unintended 
outcomes (positive 
and negative) can be 
observed so far?
 ❙ What unintended outcomes have been 
identified as a result of implementation of the 
JfYA Strategy?
 ❙ How did the JfYA Strategy contribute to the 
achievement of these outcomes?
 ❙ How do they affect progress towards 
improvement of youth employment outcomes?
 ❙ How does the emergence of these unintended 
results influence a change in the Theory 
of Change, the strategic levers, or the 
implementation activities?
 ❙ List of negative and positive 
unintended consequences, 
(disaggregated by rural/urban, 
male/female as appropriate); and 
 ❙ Implications of outcomes on the 
ultimate goal and objectives.
 ❙ Case studies
 ❙ Document review – briefing 
reports, flagship reports, 
Trust Fund annual reports, 
ADERs, Project Completion 
Reports and project mid-
term review reports, PCRs/
XSRENs
 ❙ Project review
 ❙ Indicator assessment
 ❙ Interviews
 ❙ Focus group discussions
2.4. Which 
interventions started 
under the JfYA Strategy 
have been scaled up 
and/or are ready for 
scale up?
 ❙ What conditions exist to enable scale up: 
resources, national policies, the capacity of 
the Bank, RMCs or partners?
 ❙ How should the strategy leverage successes 
to date to support the achievement of the 
objectives and targets?
 ❙ Number of interventions/ projects 
that have been scaled up; and
 ❙ Existence of supportive factors or 
conditions for scale up.
 ❙ Key informant interviews 
with JfYA focal points and 
team members KIIs with 
implementation partners, 
RMCs, other development 
agencies
 ❙ Case study
 ❙ Project review
63
Annexes
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Key Questions Sub-questions/What to look for Indicators/Measures Data/Information Sources/ 
Data Collection Methods
3. Are JfYA Strategy results sustainable or likely to be sustained? (Sustainability)
3.1. How well did 
intervention strategies 
and implementation 
address issues of 
sustainability?
 ❙ What specific measures are identified in 
the design documents and implementation 
processes to support sustainability?
 ❙ How have these materialized in the first five 
years of implementation?
 ❙ What are the emerging gaps?
 ❙ List of sustainability considerations 
in the design and implementation 
process; and 
 ❙ Number of identified gaps.
 ❙ Review of the JfYA Strategy 
document, implementation 
plan
 ❙ Key informant interviews 
with Jobs focal points and 
team members KIIs with 
implementation partners, 
RMCs, other development 
agencies
 ❙ Case study
 ❙ Project review
3.2. Which of the 
results achieved so far 
are more likely to be 
sustained, and why?
 ❙ Which strategic lever is demonstrating the 
most sustainable results?
 ❙ Which technical, financial, institutional, policy 
capacity has been established to support their 
sustainability?
 ❙ How could the emerging successes and 
systemic changes be further supported for 
sustainability?
 ❙ List of results likely to be sustained 
disaggregated by lever; and
 ❙ Number of completed projects that 
score satisfactory on sustainability.
 ❙ Case studies
 ❙ Review of PCRs/XSRENs
 ❙ Interviews with relevant 
implementation partners, 
RMCs, other development 
agencies
3.3. What are the key 
risks to sustainability 
of other intended 
outcomes going 
forward?
 ❙ What factors affect the achievement and 
sustainability of intended outcomes going 
forward?
 ❙ What needs to be implemented by the AfDB, 
RMCs and other stakeholders to support 
sustained changes and results? Mitigate 
against loss of momentum and results attained 
to date?
 ❙ List of risks to sustainability; and
 ❙ Rational assessment of risk 
mitigation strategies.
 ❙ Case studies
 ❙ Review of PCRs/XSRENs
 ❙ Interviews with 
implementation partners, 
RMCs, other development 
agencies
4. What are we learning about what works?
What are emerging 
lessons, working and/or 
promising approaches 
that can be carried 
forward?
 ❙ What are we learning about what works or 
does not work within the Bank?
 ❙ How are these learnings being integrated in 
ongoing planning and management?
 ❙ What other evidence exists from comparator 
organizations about promising/best practices 
that should be considered?
 ❙ Areas of learning.  ❙ Policy review and 
benchmarking study
 ❙ Case studies
 Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report64
Annex 2: Elaborated JfYA Strategy Theory 
of Change
Long term 
outcomes
Improve quality of life by equipping youth to realize their economic potential and spur inclusive growth in Africa
Expanded economic opportunity for African youth
Inclusive employment is achievedIntermediate 
outcomes
Short term 
outcomes
AfDB adopts youth employment as integral and embedded 
in (nearly) all activities and investments
The bank is equipped with the appropriate knowledge, 
systems and resources to integrate and deliver on a ‘Youth 
employment and employability’ mandate
Series of activities implemented that support youth jobs 
and employability throughout the Bank. Capacity building 
activities implemented for Task Managers and others
Integrate youth employment in all Sector Action Plans High 
employment impact operations
Integrate youth-focus in procurement
Jobs indicators incorporated into M&E systems including 
the Results Measurement Framework
Joint Impact Model (JIM) established
Integration
High level risks to the success of the JfYA Strategy:
Insufficient funding to support the scale of ambition in youth employment outcomesManagement of numerous, wide-ranging 
activities and lack of human resources neededLack of ownership and accountability for key activitiesLack of support for 
flagship programs in RMCs
Series of activities implemented that support RMCs in 
addressing youth employment within national contexts.  
Entrepreneurship Ecosystem Research and Knowledge 
transfer
Country Diagnostic Notes
Integrate youth employment in all Country Strategy Plans
Integrate youth employment in all Regional Integration 
Strategy Papers Support to capacity development initiatives
Support and guidance to policy makers through various 
methods
RMCs are equipped with resources, knowledge and tools 
to improve policies and build institutions to address youth 
employment issues within their countries
RMCs embed policies and frameworks to address youth 
employment across national priorities
Strategic levers
Outputs
Major  
activities
65
Annexes
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Human capital development is improved across the 
continent
 Labor markets are linked to financial opportunities
Overarching assumptions:
Consistent economic growth on the continent and in RMCs (e.g. unpredicted Covid-19 pandemic that halted many economies and prevented work in many 
instances) 
Financing for entrepreneurship (in particular) continues to be made available from different sources (Investment pillar)
Innovation
 Investment
Models for youth job creation are 
tested, documented and iterated 
upon
Various funding options are 
made available directly by 
youth-centric businesses
Private sector actors are 
engaged in innovation and 
viable solutions for youth 
employment
Reliable and 
current view of 
national youth 
labour market 
performance is 
available
Flagship 
employment 
programs are 
designed and 
implemented 
(e.g. SAPZ, 
CfE, ENABLE 
Youth)
AfDB identifies and mobilises 
partners for innovative actions
AfDB identifies and catalyzes private sector partners who can invest 
in job creation and employment for youth
Additional 
projects are 
designed 
implemented:
Desert-
to-Power 
renewable 
energy, TAAT, 
Youth ADAPT
Enabling Youth 
Employment 
index (now 
dashboard) is 
developed and 
implemented
Enabling Youth 
Employment 
index (now 
dashboard) is 
developed and 
implemented
Leverage 
various financial 
mechanisms that  
support for youth 
employment and 
entrepreneurship
Leverage 
various financial 
mechanisms 
to indirectly 
affect youth 
employment and 
entrepreneurship
Design and 
implement 
market-based 
challenge funds 
and other similar 
mechanisms
Research and 
evidence for 
enterprise 
support is 
available 
to inform  
programs 
for greatest 
impact
Ecosystem actors (RMCs and other stakeholders) adapt and scale effective 
interventions to address youth jobs and employability
Access to capital stimulating 
and creating youth jobs and 
youth entrepreneurship is 
increased
Access to capital stimulating 
and creating youth jobs and 
youth entrepreneurship is 
increased
Table A3.2: Regional distribution of primary youth employment projects 
(n=176)
Regions Number  
of Operations
Share  
(%)
Value  
(UA million)
Share of Value  
(%)
Central Africa 23 13 1,045 20.2
East Africa 32 18.2 744.45 14.3
Multi-region 20 11.4 179.58 3.5
North Africa 18 10.2 872.47 17
Southern Africa 26 14.8 489.5 9.5
West Africa 57 32.4 1,833 35.5
Total 176 100 5,164 100
 Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report66
Annex 3: Portfolio Review Tables
Table A3.1: Sectoral distribution of primary youth employment projects 
(n=176)
S.N Sector Number  
of Operations
Share  
(%)
Value  
(UA million)
Share of value 
(%)
1 Agriculture 61 34.6 1,750 33.8
2 Communications 1 0.6 59.45 1
3 Environment 6 3.5 86.91 1.7
4 Finance 9 5.2 343.66 6.6
5 Industry 1 0.6 86 1.7
6 Governance 26 14.7 682.29 13.2
7 Social 52 29.5 873 17
8 Transport 10 5.6 827 16
9 Urban Development 1 0.6 42.58 1.0
10 Water Supply and Sanitation 9 5.1 413.11 8
Total 176 100 5,164 100
67
Annexes
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Figure A3.1: Evolution of approval of primary youth employment projects by year
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
202120202019201820172016
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
1800
28
30
24
27
29
38
768.7
1,675
542
779.7
113.6
1,285
N° of approvals
Volume (Million UA)
N° of approvals Volume (Million UA)
Figure A3.2: Portfolio distribution by instruments (primary youth employment projects)
% of value
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80%
Investment projects
Program based operations
Results based /f_inancing
Line of Credit/Equity
Technical Assistance/Study 1.0%
2.5%
5.0%
20.5%
71.0%

 Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report68
Annex 4: Flagship Program Models 
and Projects
Sector Initial flagship programs Current flagship programs
ICT Coding for Employment (CfE) program: 
develop premier coding academies, match 
graduates directly with ICT employers. The 
program was expected to create 825,000 jobs.
CfE program: develop the capacity of youth and 
equip them with technology related skills for the 
21st century and in so doing, promote employability and 
entrepreneurship skills 
Job targets: 9,000,000 
Youth trained: 234,000
Lead implementing department: AHHD.1
Number of projects: One project implemented in Kenya, 
Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal and Côte d’Ivoire.
Computational Thinking program: introduce 
digital literacy, logical thinking, and complex 
problem-solving curricula in secondary 
schools. The program was expected to create 
8,393,000 jobs and train an additional 
23,956,800 youth.
Agriculture The ENABLE Youth (Empowering Novel 
Agri-Business Led Employment) program: 
help young Africans incubate new larger scale 
agri-businesses and support them in accessing 
financing for the growth of these businesses.
ENABLE Youth program: Support young Africans to 
incubate new larger scale agri-businesses and accessing 
finance
Job targets: 1,500,000 
New enterprises established: 300,000
Youth trained: None provided 
Lead implementing department: AHAI
Number of projects: 13 (6 stand-alone, 7 embedded)
* Current targets are extracted from the ENABLE Youth 
Brochure.
Countries: Zambia, South Sudan, DRC, Madagascar, 
Kenya, Mozambique Cameroon, Guinea, Sierra Leone, 
Senegal, Malawi
Rural Microenterprise program: provide 
youth with capital, skills training, and 
mentorship to launch agriculture-based micro 
enterprises. The program was expected to 
create 8,383,500 jobs and train an additional 
310,500 youth.
Agro-Industrialization Pipeline program: 
develop a steady supply of skilled labor for 
agro-industrial companies. The program was 
expected to create 1,126, 900 jobs.
Skills Enhancement Zones under Special Agro-
Processing Zones (SAPZ): Build capacities of 
stakeholders in priority agro-industrial areas including 
youth farmers and youth led enterprises /startups to 
access and optimize economic opportunities across the 
value chain. 
Job targets: No. program wide targets available 
Youth trained: No. program wide targets available 
Implemented in partnership with AHFR
Number of projects: 12 
Countries: Côte d’Ivoire, Togo, Ethiopia, Guinea, Senegal, 
Mali, Madagascar, Liberia, DRC, Nigeria, Mozambique
Industrialization Skills Enhancement Zones program: 
develop a skilled workforce aligned to employer 
needs. The program was expected to create 
3,315,000 jobs and train an additional 
27,300 youth.
69
Annexes
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
References
AfDB Documentation 
African Development Bank Group (2013a). At the Center of Africa’s Transformation: Strategy for 2013–2022. Abidjan
African Development Bank Group (2013b). Private Sector Development Strategy, 2013-2017. Abidjan
African Development Bank Group (2014a). The Bank’s Human Capital Strategy for Africa (2014-2018). Abidjan
African Development Bank. (2014b). Financial Sector Development Policy and Strategy 2014-2019. Tunis 
African Development Bank Group. (2016a). Jobs for Youth: Strategy for Creating 25 million Jobs and Equipping 50 million Youth, 2016-2025. Abidjan
African Development Bank Group (2016b), Jobs for Youth in Africa Implementation Plan. Abidjan 
African Development Bank (2017a) “Transforming Africa — Unlocking agriculture’s potential Annual Development Effectiveness” https://www.afdb.org/
en/topics-and-sectors/topics/quality-assurance-results/development-effectiveness-reviews/development-effectiveness-reviews-2017/
annual-development-effectiveness-reviews-2017
African Development Bank. (2017b). The Fund for African Private Sector Assistance. Technical Assistance Request. Entrepreneurship Lab – Continental
African Development Bank (2017c), “Urgently Accelerating Employment Opportunities for Africa’s Youth - Launching of the First Enabling Youth 
Employment Index Report for Africa”, Abidjan
African Development Bank (AfDB). (2019a). African Economic Outlook 2019 Abidjan
African Development Bank Group (2019b). Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa. Abidjan
African Development Bank (2019c) Independent Evaluation Policy. Abidjan
African Development Bank (2020), Evaluation of the AfDB’s Role in Increasing Access to Finance in Africa, Abidjan 
African Development Bank Group (2021a). Strategy for Economic Governance in Africa (SEGA) 2021-2025. Abidjan
African Development Bank Group (2021b). The African Development Bank Group Gender Strategy 2021 – 2025: Investing in Africa’s women to accelerate 
inclusive growth. Abidjan
African Development Bank Group (2021c). Skills for Employability and Productivity in Africa (SEPA) Action Plan, 2022–2025. Abidjan
African Development Bank Group (2021d), Special Agro Industrial Processing Zones (SAPZ), Transforming African Agriculture: The Feed Africa Agenda, 
AfDB Communication and External Relations Department Brochure
African Development Bank Group (2021e), Entrepreneurship Establishment Programme (EEP), Executive Summary
African Development Bank (2021f), Coding for Employment Program Progress Report, September 2021, Prepared for Rockefeller Trust Fund
African Development Bank (2021g), Mid-Term Evaluation of the Bank’s Results Measurement Framework, 2016-2025
African Development Bank Group (2022a). Bank Group’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa (2022-2026). Abidjan
African Development Bank (2022b), Briefing Session: The Innovation & Entrepreneurship Lab Team, Presentation 
African Development Bank Group (2022c). African Economic Outlook 2022; Supporting Climate Resilience and a Just Energy Transition in Africa. Abidjan
African Development Bank Group (2022d). Development of A Jobs Marker. Maximizing Employment Outcomes of the Bank’s Operations in Regional 
Member Countries. Approach Paper. Abidjan
African Development Bank Group (2022e). Evaluation of the African Development Bank Group’s support to its Regional Member Countries in Response to 
the COVID-19 Pandemic. Abidjan 
Regional Integration Strategy Papers
Eastern Africa Regional Integration Strategy Paper 2018-2022. Abidjan
Central Africa Regional Integration Strategy Paper 2019-2025. Abidjan
North Africa Regional Integration Strategy Paper 2020-2026. Abidjan
Southern Africa Regional Integration Strategy Paper 2020-2026. Abidjan
West Africa Regional Integration Strategy Paper 2020-2026. Abidjan
Country Strategy Papers
Republic of Senegal: Country Strategy Paper 2010-2015. Abidjan
Uganda Result-Based Country Strategy Paper 2011-2015. Abidjan
Togo Country Strategy Paper 2011-2015. Abidjan
Rwanda: Bank Group Country Strategy Paper 2012-2016. Abidjan
Morocco: Country Strategy Paper 2012-2016. Abidjan
 Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report70
Democratic Republic of Congo 2013-2017 Country Strategy Paper. Abidjan
Kingdom of Lesotho Country Strategy Paper 2013-2017. Abidjan
Malawi Country Strategy Paper 2013-2017. Abidjan
Democratic Republic of Congo: Combined Country Strategy Paper (CSP) 2013-2020 Update and Extension to End-2022 And 2020 Country Portfolio 
Performance Review (CPPR) Report. Abidjan
Kenya Country Strategy Paper 2014 - 2018. Abidjan
Namibia: Country Strategy Paper 2014-2018. Abidjan
Tunisia Interim Country Strategy Paper 2014 - 2015. Abidjan
Mali: Country Strategy Paper 2015-2019. Abidjan
Arab Republic of Egypt, Country Strategy Paper 2015 - 2019 Abidjan
Arab Republic of Egypt Update and Extension of the Country Strategy Paper 2015-2019 To December 2021. Abidjan
Cameroon: Joint 2015-2020 Country Strategy Paper and Country Portfolio Performance Review Report. Cameroon
Republic of Senegal: Country Strategy Paper 2016-2020. Abidjan
Togo Country Strategy Paper 2016-2020. Abidjan
Rwanda: Bank Group Country Strategy Paper 2017-2021. Abidjan
Central African Republic Country Strategy Paper 2017-2021. Abidjan
Kingdom of Morocco Country Strategy Paper 2017-2021. Abidjan
Tunisia Country Strategy Paper 2017 - 2021. Abidjan
Uganda Country Strategy Paper 2017-2021. Abidjan
Malawi Country Strategy Paper 2018-2022. Abidjan
Kenya Bank Group Country Strategy Paper 2019-2023 and Country Portfolio Performance Review. Abidjan
Kingdom of Lesotho Country Strategy Paper 2020-2024. Abidjan
Republic of Namibia: Country Strategy Paper 2020-2024. Abidjan
Mali Country Strategy Paper 2021-2025. Abidjan
Republic of Senegal: Country Strategy Paper 2021-2025. Abidjan
Togo Country Strategy Paper 2021-2026. Abidjan
Republic of Rwanda: Country Strategy Paper 2022-2026. Abidjan
Republic of Uganda Country Strategy Paper 2022-26. Abidjan
Others 
African Union (2019), Africa Youth Month 2019, Available at https://au.int/en/africa-youth-month-2019 
African Union (2020) Promoting Youth Entrepreneurship in A Policy Brief - 2020 Africa. Abidjan
Asian Development Bank Working Series (2018) Farhad Taghizadeh-Hesary et al - “Credit Risk Analysis of Small and Medium Sized Enterprises based on 
Thai Data”
Bruni, Lucilla Maria, Jamele Rigolini, and Sara Troiano. (2016). Forever Young? Social policies for a changing population in Southern Africa. Washington, 
DC: World Bank. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/24996/
Forever%20Young.pdf?sequence=18   
De Soto, H. (1989). The Mystery of Capital. New York: Basic Books
Elbadawi, I., & Loayza, N. (2008). Informality, employment and economic development in the Arab world. Journal of Development and Economic Policies, 
10(2), 25-75.
Enterprise Development (N.D), Market Development, Available at https://www.enterprise-development.org/what-works-and-why/evidence-framework/
rationale-for-market-development/ 
European Centre for Development Policy Management (2016). ECDPM strategy 2017-2021. Maastricht: ECDPM
Evaluation Cooperation Group (2012), Good Practice Standards of the ECG, ECG
Forbes Insights and Djembe Communications (2015), Job Creation in Sub-Saharan Africa, Available at https://images.forbes.com/forbesinsights/
StudyPDFs/Djembe-JobCreationinSub-SaharanAfrica-REPORT.pdf 
Fox, L., & Gandhi, D. (2021). Youth employment in sub-Saharan Africa: Progress and prospects, Africa Growth Initiative Working Paper 28, Brookings 
Institute
Gatti, R., Angel-Urdinola, D. F., Silva, J., & Bodor, A. (2011). Striving for better jobs: The Challenge of informality in the Middle East and North Africa Region. 
Washington, DC: World Bank
G20 Germany. (2017). G20 Initiative for Rural Youth Employment. Supporting the “Next Generation” in Rural Development, Agriculture and Food Security in 
developing countries. Hamburg 
71
Annexes
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Harris, J. R., & Todaro, M. P . (1970). Migration, unemployment and development: a two-sector analysis. The American economic review, 60(1), 126-142
IFAD. May 2014b. Rural Youth Evaluation Synthesis
IFAD (2019). Rural Youth Action Plan 2019-2021. Rome
IFAD (2020a). Mainstreaming youth in IFAD operations. Rome 
IFAD (2020b). Position Paper on Engaging Rural Youth at IFAD: An Approach for Connecting Youth Voices to Action. Rome
IFAD (2022). Scaling up rural youth access to inclusive financial services for entrepreneurship and employment, East and Southern Africa Division
ILO (2016). Women at work: trends 2016. Geneva: ILO.
ILO (2018a) Market Systems Development for Decent Work, Policy Brief: A Systemic Approach to Creating More and Better Jobs, Available at https://www.
ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---emp_ent/---ifp_seed/documents/publication/wcms_732124.pdf 
ILO (2018b). Independent Evaluation: ILO’s Strategy and Actions for Improved Youth Employment Prospects 2012-2017, Independent Evaluation Office; 
Geneva
ILO (2018c). Women and men in the informal economy: a statistical picture, 3rd edition. Geneva
ILO (2019a) Advancing social justice: Shaping the future of work in Africa, report of the Director-General. Geneva
ILO (2019b). World Employment and Social Outlook: Trends 2019. Geneva
ILO (2019c). Review of Practices and Methods for Monitoring and Assessing the Employment Impacts of International Financial Institutions (IFIs), 
Strengthen Project, Development and Investment Branch. Geneva
ILO (2020). Report on employment in Africa (Re-Africa): tackling the youth employment challenge. Geneva 
International Monetary Fund (2022). World economic outlook. Available at https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO#:~:text=Description%3A%20
Global%20growth%20is%20expected,in%20the%20two%20largest%20economies
Joint Impact Model (2021), Methodology Paper, Available at www.jointimpactmodel.org/_files/ugd/7aa894_13651634add6407a93c09a851fb705c1.pdf
Mastercard Foundation (2021). Youth Think Tank Report: Spotlight on Youth Entrepreneurship, Available at https://mastercardfdn.org/wp-content/
uploads/2021/05/MCF17000-YTT-Small-Scale-Business-Report-vFA-compressed-1.pdf 
Mund, Chandra Sekhar (2020) “Problems of MSME finance in India and the role of Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE)” 
Journal of Economics and Finance
Ng’weno, A., & Porteus, D. (2018). Can Africa Show How Gig Workers Get a Fair Share in the Digital Economy? Center for Global Development Blog, 
Available at https://www.cgdev.org/blog/can-africa-show-how-gig-workers-get-fair-share-digital-economy 
OECD, (2021) “Applying Evaluation Criteria Thoughtfully”, Evaluation Criteria,
OECD (2022) DynEmp: Measuring job creation by start-ups and young firms, Available at https://www.oecd.org/sti/dynemp.htm 
O’Higgins, N. (2017). Rising to the youth employment challenge. New evidence on key policy issues. Geneva: International Labour Office
Porta, R. La, & Shleifer, A. (2014). Informality and Development. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 109–126
Psilos, P ., Galloway, T. (2018). What Works in Entrepreneurship Education and Training Programs for Youth? Washington, DC: USAID’s YouthPower: 
Implementation, YouthPower Action
Rauch, J. E. (1991). Modelling the informal sector formally. Journal of development Economics, 35(1), 33-47
Salazar-Xirinachs, J.M.; Nübler, I.; Kozul-Wright, R. (eds) (2014). Transforming economies: Making industrial policy work for growth, jobs and development 
(Geneva, ILO)
Sinha S, Holmberg, J, Thomas, M (2013) “What works for market development: A review of the evidence” UTV Working Paper
Tandem, G., (2020), Making the most effective use of grants and technical assistance to support financial institutions. CDC Investment Works, Available 
at https://www.bii.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Making-effective-use-of-grants-and-TA-to-support-financial-institutions-Research-
Summary.pdf 
Teal, Francis. (2021) “A special issue: Education and labor market outcomes in sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of African Economies 30.1: 1-12
USAID, “Market Based Approaches to Development” (N.D) https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/private-sector-engagement/market-based-approaches 
USAID (2017) Youth Compass: A Strategic Guide to Strengthen Youth Activities, Full Report, Available at https://www.youthpower.org/sites/default/files/
YouthPower/resources/1.YouthCompass_Final_12-1-17_Web.pdf 
USAID (2018). Assessment of the Implementation Of USAID’s Youth In Development Policy 
USAID (2021) Youth in development policy , 2021 Update 
World Bank (2014). Youth employment in sub-Saharan Africa. African Development Forum, World Bank Publications. https://documents1.worldbank.org/
curated/en/301371468003940792/pdf/ACS81330WP0P12977300Box385165B00PUBLIC0.pdf
World Bank Group, (2018), Integrated Youth Employment Programs: A Stocktake of Evidence on what works in Youth Employment Programs, 2018, Jobs 
Working Paper Issue No. 24
World Bank Group. (2019). Profiting from Parity: Unlocking the Potential of Women’s Business in Africa. World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.
org/handle/10986/31421
World Bank (2020) “Africa’s Pulse: Analysis of Issues Shaping Africa’s Economic Future”, Washington, DC: World Bank
World Bank Group, (2021), Jobs Umbrella Multidonor Trust Fund Annual Report 2020-2021, Washington, DC: World Bank
 Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report72
World Bank (2022a) Development Indicators https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.UEM.1524.ZS.
World Bank (2022b) Africa Development Overview https://www.worldbank.org/en/region/afr/overview
World Economic Forum. (2016). 3 Ways We can Tackle Youth Employment. 
Young Africa Works, (N.d) Digital Report, Available at https://mastercardfdn.org/research/young-africa-works/ 
Young Africa Works (2018). The Mastercard Foundation Strategy to Promote and Expand Employment Opportunities for Young People in Africa, Available at 
https://mastercardfdn.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/Young-Africa-Works-Strategy.pdf
73
Annexes
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
Endnotes
1 Primary youth employment projects were defined as those that directly promote youth employment and employability and reflect this in their 
goals, objectives or results. Secondary youth employment projects are those that do not define youth employment as an objective / result but have 
potential for creating jobs for youth. This category of projects is characterized by the presence of JfYA related indicators, such as jobs created, 
youth trained, SMEs supported, and financing made available for investments in youth businesses.
2 This was evidenced in the case study countries of Kenya, Morocco, Democratic Republic of Congo, Senegal, and Malawi.
3 Strategy implemented through three strategic intervention levers: (i) Integration- the Bank will equip itself and Regional Member Countries (RMCs) 
to become engines of job creation for young Africans; (ii) Innovation- the Bank will work with partners to incubate, implement, assess, and scale 
promising solutions; and (iii) Investment- the Bank will catalyze private sector investments that fuel job creation and employment for youth.
4 https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---inst/documents/publication/wcms_865332.pdf
5 ILO WESO 2023: A new indicator developed by the ILO, the Jobs Gap, captures all persons without employment that are interested in finding a job.
6 ILO, World Employment and Social Outlook | Trends 2023
7 Annex 2 Risks and Mitigation Measures, page 55, Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy.
8 CSPs provide a framework for Bank assistance and mark the beginning of the Bank’s project cycle i.e., Programming.
9 Job quality refers to the extent to which the job meets the global agenda on decent work (rights at work, employment, social protection, and social 
dialogue).
10 Including FMO (Dutch Development Bank), British International Investment (BII), PROPARCO, Belgian Investment Company for Developing Countries 
(BIO), Findev Canada, CIF, KfW, OeEB (Development Bank of Austria), and Private Infrastructure Development Group (PIDG)
11 Action 5: Innovation and Information Lab, Page 37, Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy. A brochure on the ELAB can be found here https://www.afdb.
org/en/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/job-youth/Jobs_for_Youth_in_Africa_Innovation_Lab-it.pdf
12 The study considered all five RISPs and took a random sample of three countries per region. Some countries had more than one CSP in the period 
2016–2021.
13 World Bank (2022b) Africa Overview https://www.worldbank.org/en/region/afr/overview. Youth are defined in this report as 16–30 years old.
14 ILO (2022a) Global Employment Trends for Youth 2022: Africa. Youth are defined by the ILO as 15–24 years old..
15 This study finds that men and women aged between 15 and 19 are building human capital and or entering the labor market. At the ages 20–24, 
men are entering the labor market and searching for a steady livelihood whilst women are beginning to reduce labor force participation to start a 
family and care for children. At ages 25–35, men are building a livelihood (farm, business, or steady wage job), while women may be re-entering 
the labor market.
16 Morsy, H. and Mukasa, A.N. (2019), Youth Jobs, Skill and Educational Mismatches in Africa, Working Paper Series N° 326, African Development 
Bank, Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire.
17 https://www.statista.com/statistics/1295678/startup-failure-rate-in-africa-by-country/
18 World Bank Group. (2019). Profiting from Parity: Unlocking the Potential of Women’s Business in Africa
19 50 million number includes the number of jobs created and additional youth trained.
20 Policy Based Operations are now known as Program Based Operations following the 2012 Bank Group Policy on Program-Based Operations.
21 Agriculture sector (Empowering Novel Agri-Business Led Employment/ENABLE, Rural Microenterprise program); Industrialization sector (Agro-
Industrialization Pipeline program, Skills Enhancement Zones program) and Information, Communication and Technology/ICT sector (Coding for 
Employment (CfE) program, Computational Thinking program).
22 This review covered all projects captured in the Bank’s Systems Application Platform (SAP) and the Youth Entrepreneurship and Innovation Multi 
Donor Trust Fund (YEI MDTF) funded projects.” It is possible that there are other youth employment initiatives that are missing. The SAP is a 
centralized system within the Bank that enables every department to access and share common data.
23 Ghana, Togo, Mali, Nigeria, Guinea, Zimbabwe, Malawi, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania and Rwanda.
24 Age, sex, family status, disability, education levels, and geographical location.
25 Further updates are provided on targeted activities for secondary school children in subsequent sections of the report.
26 Some of the flagship programs expected to contribute most to the achievements of these targets were not implemented as planned. See Section on 
Integration.
 Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report74
27 See Teal, Francis. “JAE special issue: Education and labor market outcomes in sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of African Economies 30.1 (2021): 
1–12 on linkage between education outcomes and jobs.
28 See footnote 14 of African Development Bank Group. (2016a). Jobs For Youth: Strategy for Creating 25 million Jobs and Equipping 50 million Youth, 
2016–2025
29 Up to 23 African countries are either in or at risk of debt distress as of February 2022.  This has prompted the Bank to shrink individual country’s 
headroom due to their increasing exposure from debt, a factor that poses serious challenges to the completion and or generation of new projects 
within individual RMCs.
30 Language adopted in the Communiqué of the Board of Governors at the AfDB Annual Meetings in May 2022; Algeria, China, Egypt, Eswatini, 
Namibia, Nigeria and South Africa entered a reservation and proposed “Russia-Ukraine Conflict”.
31 In the course of 2022, the Bank started the process of designing TYS 2.0 expected to run from 2023-2032.
32 Note that at the time of the evaluation, the Bank was revising the Financial Sector Development Strategy.
33 Denmark, Norway, Italy, Netherlands and Sweden.
34 This mid-term review indicator performance assessment did not address the four impact level indicators.
35 The time frame for some indicators is 2030.
36 The evaluation team did not receive any information on annual targets from either AHHD or SNDR.
37 According to the PD 02/2015 directives, time from approval to first disbursement should be less than six months.
38 The evaluation team became aware on ongoing work on classification of projects in late 2022.
39 This analysis was conducted for only primary youth employment projects and covers both standalone projects and components of institutional 
strengthening in broader development projects.
40 Agriculture (Empowering Novel Agri-Business Led Employment/ENABLE, Rural Microenterprise program); Industrialization (Agro-Industrialization 
Pipeline program, Skills Enhancement Zones program) and Information, Communication and Technology/ICT (Coding for Employment program, 
Computational Thinking program)
41 Flagship program costs were estimated at USD 3.5 billion in the Implementation Plan. The evaluation team has used the conversion rate of May 
2016 of 0.70 for changing US dollars to Units of Account. The Special Fund was expected to be composed of Bank resources (AfDB and ADF) and 
external partner contributions.
42 UA 1.174 billion includes the USD 2 million grant for the CfE program, as well as other leveraged funds. It excludes counterpart funding from 
RMCs.
43 AfDB (no date). SMEnhancer - Enterprise Development Digital Platform. Fact Sheet.
44 At the time of the evaluation, there was a new initiative under design, i.e., Entrepreneurship Establishment Program (EEP) to coordinate and 
monitoring of MSME development activities across the Bank. Also in May 2022, the Bank established a separate division under the PIVP complex to 
coordinate non-financial SME support.
45 Nigeria - Investment in Digital and Creative Entreprises (I-DICE) ; Burundi-Projet d’appui à l’entreprenariat et à la promotion des microentreprises 
des jeunes et des femmes; Tanzania SAPZ feasibility study; Senegal-projet de zone de transformation agro-industrielle du centre ou agropole-
centre; YEIB identification missions. For example, the mapping of 1,082 ESOs across Africa conducted by the Lab is now available to entrepreneurs 
registered on the ENNOVA to be able to access BDS. It has also been used by YEI MDTF in refining its geographical selection.
46 The target beneficiaries and scope of knowledge generation does not include assessment of Bank’s youth employment interventions as expected in 
the JfYA Strategy document (AfDB 2017b; 2022c).
47 Excludes the activity to establish the Jobs for Youth in Africa that has been covered under the Financing Sub-Section.
48 Since 2010, the AfDB has been a shareholder of the AGF, whose primary mandate is to support access to finance for SMEs.
49 The Bank invested EUR7 million in the Cathay Africinvest Innovation Fund and another EUR 7 million in the Janngo Capital Fund in April 2022 all 
targeting early-stage ventures, start-ups and other SMEs. Additional projected investment of EUR 14.5 million by January 2023.
50 Bank staff have indicated that 6 countries have been identified for lending in 2023, i.e., Liberia, Ethiopia, DRC, Côte d’Ivoire, Nigeria and Tanzania.
51 The Implementation Plan estimates the total cost at USD 5,876,452,200, which translates into UA 4,146,142,535.61 using the May 2016 
conversion rate.
52 Ref. the Portfolio Overview: the portfolio of primary youth employment projects was dominated by investment projects amounting to UA 3.6 billion 
(70.4% of the portfolio value), followed by program-based operations (21.2%), results-based financing (4.9%), lines of credit/equity (2.3%) and 
institutional support/study (1.2%).
53 The portfolio review categorized 53 as secondary youth employment projects and the remaining 41 had no youth considerations.
75
Annexes
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
54 For example, anticipated collaborations around PBOs, work with the Africa SME program, AFAWA as indicated in the implementation plan have not 
yet materialized. Lost opportunities for country level coordination that could have improved youth employment outcomes across projects were also 
observed in the country case studies.
55 Current youth representatives are prominent youth entrepreneurs with strong African and international recognition in line with the guidelines set out 
in the implementation plan.
56 Apart from Presidential Unit briefs prepared ahead of missions, other comprehensive reports are focused on only specific elements of the strategy, 
e.g., flagship reports or the monthly flash reports that provide updates to the President’s office on key deliverables for a specific year. The planned 
strategy mid-term review that would take stock of implementation status, strategy performance and make relevant recommendations to the Bank’s 
Management was subsequently superseded by this mid-term evaluation in 2021.
57 Indirect jobs are broken down as follows: (i) Indirect impact (supply chain): impacts at the investee/ project’s suppliers and their suppliers; 
(ii) Induced impact related to re-spending of earned salaries; and (iii) Forward impact related to enabling effect of additional products and/or 
services provided by the investment
58 As was the case for the Nigeria - Investment in Digital and Creative Enterprises Program that was approved in December 2021.

An IDEV Thematic Evaluation
idev.afdb.org
African Development Bank Group
Avenue Joseph Anoma, 01 BP 1387, Abidjan 01, Côte d’Ivoire
Phone: +225 27 20 26 28 41
E-mail: idevhelpdesk@afdb.org
Design & layout: CRÉON • www.creondesign.net
About this evaluation
Independent Development Evaluation (IDEV) conducted a Mid-Term Evaluation (MTE) of 
the African Development Bank Group’s (AfDB or “the Bank”) Jobs for Youth in Africa 
(JfYA) Strategy 2016-2025. Launched in 2016, the JfYA Strategy aimed to create 
25 million jobs and positively impact 50 million youth by 2025. The MTE assessed 
progress from June 2016 to December 2021, focusing on primary youth employment 
projects, to provide lessons and recommendations to improve the Strategy’s effectiveness 
during its remaining period. 
The evaluation found the JfYA Strategy relevant for addressing youth employment across 
Africa. It aligns with the Bank’s corporate strategies, and development priorities within the 
regional member countries. However, the changing economic growth context, recurrent 
risks, and unrealistic expectations undermine the validity and realism of the Strategy’s 
targets. While the Strategy provides quantifiable youth employment targets that facilitate 
dialogue, resource mobilization, and communication/visibility, concerns raised relate to 
shortfalls in funding, and the absence of necessary human resources and management 
systems. It was difficult to determine actual progress towards achieving the Strategy’s 
outcomes due to significant monitoring and reporting gaps. The sustainability risks arise 
from implementation gaps; inadequate focus on youth beneficiaries; limited efforts 
to address financing barriers for youth-led, and small and medium enterprises; and 
exogenous factors affecting overall macroeconomic stability and resilience. 
The evaluation highlighted lessons on risk mitigation, governance, accountability 
mechanisms, skills development, access to finance and non-financial support, and 
utilization of small grants. Recommendations for the Bank include updating the Strategy 
and implementation plan, strengthening results measurement, learning plus leadership 
and coordination of youth employment across the Bank, and continuing resource 
mobilization for impactful projects.
An IDEV Thematic Evaluation  Mid-Term Evaluation of the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy 2016–2025 – Summary Report