62 ESSAY
3
ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
AND STRUCTURAL 
TRANSFORMATION
63ESSAY
ESSAY
Making entrepreneurship work for Africa’s youth  64
VIEWPOINT
Realizing Africa’s demographic dividend: A call to action  67
Family-owned businesses as incubators of entrepreneurs  
for Africa’s structural transformatiom   70
Accelerating productive MSMEs: The much-needed catalyst  
for Nigeria’s socio-economic recovery  73
The future of African youth and women entrepreneurship  
and their roles in the region’s economy  76
Nurturing entrepreneurial scaling in Africa  78
Getting the value out of venture capital  80
How companies integrate smallholder farmers in their value chains in Africa  84
Leveraging the innovativeness of Africa’s youth through startups 87
64 ESSAY
Making entrepreneurship  
work for Africa’s youth
By 2030, over 40% of the global youth population will be African and by 2050, 
the number of African youths is expected to reach 830 million . This growth trend 
is exciting, given the potential for young people in the workforce to unleash a 
demographic dividend that positively transforms millions of lives. 
Unfortunately, Africa’s youth bulge may not drive the economic growth and wealth 
creation that is expected because more than 1 in 4 young people in Africa’s economies 
are not in employment, education, or training (NEET).
1 The African Development 
Bank estimates that each year, up to 12 million youths in Africa enter a workforce 
that has only 3.1 million jobs available  and consequently, 1.7 million new jobs need 
to be created each month to meet employment needs.
Entrepreneurship for job creation
The lack of productive, formal employment is increasingly pushing Africa’s youth to 
start their own businesses as entrepreneurs. Africa boasts the world’s highest rates of 
entrepreneurship, with more than 1 in 5 working-age Africans starting a new business 
and more than three-quarters of the youth planning to start one within five years.
2
The challenge is that this entrepreneurship is mainly self-employment in the 
informal sector, what the International Labour Organization classifies as “vulnerable 
employment.” Ninety-five percent of Africa’s working youth fall into this category,
3 
compared to less than 50% in the Americas, Europe, and Asia. Vulnerable employment 
is reflected in low productivity, low earnings, and difficult working conditions. 
Whether in the informal or formal sector, entrepreneurship in Africa is often plagued 
with problems including but not limited to:
1. Lack of access to appropriate funding instruments required to start, maintain, 
and grow a business.
2. High cost of operations due to inadequate infrastructure. 
3. Poor macroeconomic conditions.
4. Government policies unsupportive to business.
1 ILOSTAT. 2023. African youth face pressing challenges in the transition from school to work.
2 Ichikowitz Family Foundation. 2022. Africa Youth Survey.
3 ILO. 2018. Women and Men in the Informal Economy: A Statistical Picture, 3rd Edition. International Labour Organization.
ADA OSAKWE
Founder and Managing 
Partner, Agrolay 
Ventures and the Nuli 
Juice Company 
@ada_osakwe
Africa boasts the 
world’s highest rates 
of entrepreneurship, 
with more than 1 in 5 
working-age Africans 
starting a new 
business and more 
than three-quarters 
of the youth planning 
to start one within 
five years.
65ESSAY
Coupling these issues with low levels of economic growth and poor social 
protection schemes, African economies are expected to experience even more youth 
employment challenges in the future. 
As an entrepreneur, I have directly experienced most of these hurdles. In 2016, I 
launched Nuli Foods, a medium-sized agribusiness that manufactures nutritious 
beverages with locally grown fruits and vegetables. Nuli has contributed to Nigeria’s 
economic landscape by creating jobs for youth, reducing  post-harvest losses, 
creating steady incomes for smallholder farmers, and giving Nigerians access to 
better nutrition. However, building this business has come with significant challenges, 
including difficulties securing financing from banks and public institutions, high 
operating costs, crippling inflation rates, and instability in government policies.
Despite the myriad challenges facing anyone trying to build a business in Africa, African 
youth continue to have a strong entrepreneurial spirit, leading to entrepreneurship 
being considered as the solution to Africa’s job malaise. This is partly fueled by 
the increasing influence of digital technologies that provide new opportunities for 
innovation across sectors. Consequently, over the last decade, billions of dollars have 
been committed to developing Africa’s entrepreneurs. However, most public and 
donor-funded youth projects are failing to adequately provide the systemic support 
Africa’s young entrepreneurs need. For example, a recent Voxdev report states 
that approximately USD $1 billion  is spent yearly on entrepreneurship training in 
developing countries.
4 The report also notes that the returns from these investments 
are not yielding economic and social impacts.  
Rethinking entrepreneur-led job creation in Africa
We must begin to reconsider the models of entrepreneurship support that exist 
in Africa to ensure that young people are not being blinded by a false narrative 
of future wealth and stability. Academic institutions, governments, donors, and 
capital providers should be more intentional about promoting a more enabling 
environment for entrepreneurship to thrive with the intention of creating jobs on a 
massive scale in Africa.
To achieve this, an approach to consider is providing focused support to “SME Eagles.” 
Micro, small, and medium enterprises (SMEs) account for 80% to 90% of jobs on the 
continent, making them significant contributors to socio-economic development. 
Among these are enterprises that have demonstrated remarkable resilience 
because they have perfected their business models, created strong operational 
structures, grown revenues, and expanded their businesses, despite being faced 
with the Africa-specific challenges outlined above. These businesses can be 
referred to as SME Eagles.
4 Voxdev Literature. September 2023. Training Entrepreneurs Issue 3. 
Micro, small, and 
medium enterprises 
(SMEs) account 
for 80% to 90% 
of jobs on the 
continent, making 
them significant 
contributors to 
socio-economic 
development. 
66 ESSAY
SME Eagles have the capacity to provide stable, wage employment for millions of 
young people, serving as anchors that create and sustain jobs. An example is a 
150-tons-per-day milk processing factory in northern Nigeria, owned by a 30 year 
old entrepreneur. To meet the needs of the factory, this entrepreneur developed an 
effective “outgrower” model with milk collection centers where rural pastoralists, the 
majority of whom are youths and women, deposit their milk daily in return for an 
income. Today, 18,000 farmers are part of this SME Eagle’s network, after only one 
year of operation. That’s 18,000 new, stable jobs, with the potential for thousands 
more as the factory expands production.
Wage employment also emerges when new firms are created. Because SME 
Eagles are tried, tested, and led by experienced entrepreneurs in a proven market, 
replicating their businesses de-risks failure for new entrepreneurs. Socially 
innovative franchising programs that match youth with these businesses, 
particularly in sectors that have the highest potential for impact, can be explored. 
They get the benefit of leap-frogging the trial and error stages of entrepreneurship, 
because SME Eagles will share their processes and business models with them, 
as well as the comfort of establishing an already proven business that has existing 
market demand. Furthermore, these youths will also get essential leadership 
training, mentorship, and business structure support. 
Catalyzing entrepreneur-led job creation with SME Eagles will require providing 
affordable capital through blended finance mechanisms. For example, grants and 
other concessional funds, credit guarantees, interest rebates, and other tailor-made 
financing solutions could be made available for the acquisition of the franchise 
operations of an SME Eagle, or the establishment of SME Eagle entrepreneurial 
linkage programs. 
Ultimately, for entrepreneurship to live up to its expectations for job-creation, SME 
Eagles must be enabled to thrive. Focusing government, donor, and private sector 
financial and policy support on SME Eagles mitigates the high risk of entrepreneurship 
failures. By providing the supporting business policies and institutional support, 
effective government regulations and incentives, workforce training subsidies, and 
affordable financing to these already de-risked, high impact, high productivity local 
SMEs, a more resilient form of entrepreneurship will emerge, driving stable job 
creation and inclusive economic growth for Africa’s youth.
67VIEWPOINT
Realizing Africa’s demographic 
dividend: A call to action
Africa stands at a crossroads, facing both unprecedented opportunity and daunting 
challenges on the path to realizing its demographic dividend. With a youthful population 
that could potentially fuel a transformative wave of economic growth and development, 
the continent is poised for significant progress. However, several formidable hurdles stand 
in its way. Among these challenges, the role of medium, small, and micro enterprises 
(MSMEs) emerges as a critical factor, with limited access to finance and loans, stringent 
collateral requirements, and a lack of capacity-building opportunities posing significant 
barriers to the growth of these businesses. Furthermore, the broader issue of financial 
inclusion amplifies these challenges. In addressing these multifaceted problems, 
Africa must overcome these hurdles to harness the promise of its youthful population, 
ultimately turning demographic potential into lasting socio-economic progress.
In line with our mission to set standards for sustainable business practices, Access Bank 
has been intentional about providing innovative solutions for the markets and communities 
we serve, bridging the gaps in access to finance and capacity building for entrepreneurs. 
Our lending proposition provides affordable financing with flexible collateral options for 
MSMEs. Currently, we have a bouquet of over 20 loan offerings targeted at different sectors.
We, however, find that access to knowledge and market remain two major reasons 
MSMEs in Africa are unable to access finance.
5 This is because MSMEs are typically 
informal, unregistered, do not keep financial records, lack succession planning, and 
have sales restricted to single locations. 
To bridge these gaps, we strive to go beyond banking, providing access to trainings, 
advisory services, networking, and discount offerings to broaden the knowledge of 
MSMEs. In doing this, we aim to help these businesses improve their basic practices 
and ultimately help them boost their profitability.
Through the AccesSMEZone—our online, real time Learning Management Platform—
which is the first of its kind in the Nigerian banking industry, MSMEs can access free 
courses on various business topics. Our capacity building programs have impacted 
over 200,000 MSMEs within the last five years, with over 25,000 trained. 
Over the years, we have supported Africa’s economic growth by helping more than 
20,000 enterprises grow and create more jobs, by accessing over $232 million 
in financing. About one-third of the beneficiaries of this lending methodology are 
women-led/owned MSMEs who have accessed finance through our W-Power Loan 
for women—discounted financing priced significantly below market lending rates. 
5 UNDESA. 2021. PDF-SDG-2021-01. “Strengthening national capacities for enhancing MSME resilience and building 
forward better to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in developing countries participating in the Belt 
and Road Initiative.” https://www.un.org/en/unpdf/sdg-2021-01.
SEYI KUMAPAYI
Executive Director for 
African Subsidiaries, 
Access Bank PLC
@OluseyiKumapayi
68 VIEWPOINT
Why is this important? 
Put simply, Africa has the highest proportion of women entrepreneurs in the world, 
with OECD research revealing that more than a quarter of all businesses on the 
continent are in the process of starting or managing a business. 6 In the same 
vein, this means, our female entrepreneurs have a great potential to contribute to 
the growth of the continent’s economy, if maximized. It is with this vision that we 
established the “W” Initiative, to provide women with capacity building, mentoring 
programs, and maternal health services.
With a presence in 13 African countries, the Access Bank “W” Initiative has been able 
to make an indelible mark across the continent, impacting over 3,145,310 women.
7
Despite the evident strides that the Bank and other like-minded institutions have 
made to bridge the financing and inclusion gap, there remains a disconnect between 
financiers and the underserved populace. 
The key issues? Accessibility, simplicity, and trust. 
While concerns around accessibility are being addressed through agency banking 
and other mobile and internet banking options like USSD, simplicity and trust are 
still a work in progress. To address the issue of simplicity, Access Bank developed 
the Access Money Wallet and Access Wallet products. Through these offerings, a 
customer’s mobile number can serve as a prepaid store of value while they are also 
empowered to create unique bank account numbers. Over 11.9 million accounts have 
been opened under this initiative in the last three years. Also, through the “Access 
Closa” agent banking product, we have been able to cascade the positives of being 
part of the formal banking sector to millions of Africans. Approximately three million 
accounts have been opened since this initiative’s inception. To widely address the 
issue of trust, however, more proactive financial literacy programs and community 
outreach initiatives need to be implemented to demystify banking processes, build 
awareness, and establish trust.
As we deepen our implementation of these initiatives, we continue to learn valuable 
lessons along the way. One of these lessons is that to fully realize Africa’s demographic 
dividend, a comprehensive set of policies and strategies must be implemented.
First, governments must prioritize investments in tangible education and skill 
development for youths, entrepreneurs, and women, ensuring that high-quality 
education is accessible to all—particularly girls and marginalized communities. 
Gender equality should be promoted through policies that empower women and 
girls, including initiatives that combat gender-based violence; ensure equal access to 
education and economic opportunities; as well as promote maternal and child health, 
6 Anzetse Were. 4 October 2022. OECD Development Matters. “How women stabilize and grow economies in Africa.” 
7 Access Bank. 2022 Annual Report and Accounts. “Building Bridges; Connecting the Future.” https://www.accessbank-
plc.com/annual-report/AccessBank_2022_Annual_Report.pdf.
69VIEWPOINT
family planning, and disease prevention. Job creation policies must be formulated to 
stimulate economic growth and diversify economies beyond resource dependence, 
with an emphasis on supporting MSMEs and fostering innovation. These policies, 
when implemented effectively and concurrently, can pave the way for Africa to 
harness its demographic dividend and achieve sustainable development.
We must remember, Africa’s demographic dividend is not guaranteed. The window 
of opportunity is narrowing, and the time to act is now! With an understanding of 
the magnitude of the challenge, we also know this is a window that Africa cannot 
afford to miss. This drives us to take our commitment to impact seriously. Annually, 
we dedicate 1% of our profit-before-tax to sustainability.
8 However, we cannot do 
it alone. Governments, businesses, civil society, and international partners must 
come together to create an environment that fosters human capital development, 
economic growth, and social progress.
8 Access Bank. February 2020. Access Bank PLC Sustainability Policy. https://investorrelations.accessbankplc.com/
Accessbankgroup/media/Documents/corp-governance/Sustainability-Policy.pdf.
We must 
remember, Africa’s 
demographic 
dividend is not 
guaranteed. 
The window of 
opportunity is 
narrowing, and the 
time to act is now!
FIGURE 8
ARE AFRICAN ECONOMIES INNOVATING AS EXPECTED?
The rate of innovation varies widely across the continent. There are a number of "overachievers", such as 
Madagascar, Rwanda, or South Africa that outperform given their level of economic development. However, 
several African economies are also falling behind expected trends, including economic heavyweights such as 
Ethiopia, Nigeria, and Egypt.
Note: The Global innovation Index (GII) is prepared by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). The index is calculated using 80 indicators from 
various data sources. The 80 indicators fall into 7 broad categories: institutions, human capital and research (including education), infrastructure, econological 
sustainability, market sophistication, business sophistication, knowledge and technology outputs, and creative outputs. 
Source: World Intellectual Property Organization. Global Innovation Index. 2023.  
GDP PER CAPITA, PPP LOGARITHMIC SCALE (THOUSANDS OF $)
GII SCORE
India
Indonesia
Pakistan
Brazil
Nigeria
Ethiopia
Egypt
Phillipines
Vietnam Thailand
Tanzania
Kenya
South
Africa
Uganda
Algeria
Ukraine
Angola
Ghana
Morocco
Mozambique
Uzbekistan
Cameroon
Cote d'Ivoire
Madagascar
Niger
Burkina Faso
Mali
Zambia
Senegal
Zimbabwe
Benin
Burundi
Guinea
Jordan
Rwanda
Tunisia
Togo
Mauritania
BotswanaJamaica
Mongolia
Namibia
Republic
of Moldova
MauritiusNorth Macedonia
Cabo Verde
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
10
14
18
22
26
30
34
38
70 VIEWPOINT
Family-owned businesses as 
incubators of entrepreneurs for 
Africa’s structural transformation
In the Political Declaration adopted in the leadup to the 2023 United Nations General 
Assembly Summit (UNGAS) on the United Nations Agenda 2030 and its Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), United Nations (UN) Member States declared that “the 
achievement of the SDGs is in peril” and are committed “to take the actions necessary 
to reverse declines and accelerate progress… and implement the SDGs.”
9 Family-owned 
businesses (FOB), defined here, as “companies where members of the same family, 
or related family branches, hold a majority interest…and exerts a dominant influence 
on the strategic direction of the firm through ownership, governance, management 
and vision” can play a crucial role in accelerating progress in Africa towards achieving 
the SDGs.
10 FOBs could also be critical for realizing the Aspirations of Agenda 2063, 
the African Union (AU) long-term plan for Africa’s structural transformation and 
development. South Korea provides a good example of a country where family-owned 
businesses known as chaebols, played a leading role in the structural transformation 
of that country and its emergence out of poverty. 
According to a recent INSEAD report, FOBs and family-controlled businesses 
“account for two-thirds of all businesses, 70-89% of global GDP and 50-80% of 
all jobs in most countries.”
11 In Africa, they account for about 70% of  small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs). They differ in size, ownership type, and revenue. They 
include large conglomerates that dominate the economies of countries across 
the world and husband-and-wife shops along the streets. They incubate and 
nurture the fourth factor of production, entrepreneurship.
12 Unfortunately, specific, 
focused policy discussions about their economic and social importance are rare. 
They are often subsumed, in policy discussions on industrialization, structural 
transformation, and economic growth in the private sector and MSMEs, as in SDG 
Target 8.3 which proposes to “promote development-oriented policies that support 
productive activities, decent job creation, entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, 
and encourage the formalization of micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises, 
including through access to financial services.”
9 United Nations General Assembly. 2023. “Political declaration of the high-level political forum on sustainable develop-
ment convened under the auspices of the General Assembly.” 
10 FFI Practitioner. 2020. “Professionalizing the Business Family: The Five Pillars of Competent, Committed, and Sustain-
able Ownership.” https://digital.ffi.org/pdf/ffi_professionalizing_the_business_family_v6.pdf.
11 Albers-Schoenberg A., Zeisberger C., Bennedsent M., Tatar S. 2020. “The Institutionalization of Family Firms – 
Europe.” INSEAD. 
12 Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. “Factors of Production – The Economic Lowdown Podcast & Transcript.” 
KASIRIM  
NWUKE
Managing Partner, 
Mirisak & Associates 
71VIEWPOINT
Africa’s family-owned businesses have expanded in recent times due to a number of 
factors, including a) the retreat of the state in formerly socialist-oriented countries 
like Tanzania, b) the growing inability of the formal and informal sectors to create 
well-paying decent jobs, c) inadequate income from formal employment, d) the 
aspiration to be wealthy to provide adequately for offsprings, e) limited availability 
of formal old age social security/pension, f) exposure to international experience, 
and g) leakages in public finances (high levels of corruption and the need to launder 
proceeds of corruption). 
African FOBs are fettered by a number of factors, some exogenous others 
endogenous. Endogenous factors are largely governance-related and include 
failure to institute or plan for an orderly succession upon the death of the 
founder. Exogenous challenges include the fast pace of technological change 
and globalization that have made possible trade across borders, exposing family-
owned businesses to greater global competition than FOB’s in other parts of the 
world during their nascence. Second, many African countries are facing a very 
unfavorable macroeconomic environment, with rising debt burden, high inflation, 
and shortages of foreign exchange, all adversely affecting the capacity of FOBs 
to survive, compete, or scale up. Furthermore, FOBs are very vulnerable to 
political uncertainty, and many have fallen victim to the rise of ethnic politics in 
many African countries. Also, countries are under pressure to mobilize additional 
domestic resources to finance the SDGs and Agenda 2063, and, in pursuit of this, 
they have introduced new taxes, expanded the tax bracket, and intensified tax 
efforts, actions which unfortunately fetter the growth of family-owned businesses. 
Finally, inadequate skills and knowledge make technological upgrading difficult 
and expensive for FOBs. 
Exogenous constraints aside, FOBs face endogenous challenges the most important 
of which is governance. They often fail to put in place adequate and robust internal 
governance structures to either push the business to advance past the entrepreneurial 
stage or survive the death of the founder. Their growth can be constrained by the norm 
of reciprocity in traditional societies and Africa’s extended family system wherein the 
founder will be expected to hire family members, relatives, and friends without due 
consideration for competence and professionalism. The high incidence of poverty 
and resultant high dependency ratio creates a situation where the ownership of a 
business is interpreted as evidence of wealthiness and instigates expectations of 
financial support from relatives. Sending children to the West for higher education, 
a proclivity of Africa’s wealthy presents a risk to the survival of the FOB as some of 
these children may never return to continue and grow the businesses.
13 
13 Nwuke, Kasirim. 2021. “Creating Dynasties of Wealth and Prosperity in Africa.” https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/
piece-advice-wealthy-african-creating-dynasty-wealth-prosperity-1c/.
Exogenous 
constraints 
aside, FOBs face 
endogenous 
challenges the most 
important of which 
is governance. 
They often fail 
to put in place 
adequate and robust 
internal governance 
structures to either 
push the business 
to advance past the 
entrepreneurial stage 
or survive the death 
of the founder. 
72 VIEWPOINT
The initial source of funding can be another source of threat to the survival of 
the African family-owned business. Some of the larger family-owned businesses 
are either the “transformation” or conversions of corrupt enrichment by former 
government officials or the products of rent-seeking by the founders. Some of these 
businesses die upon the death of the founder as the conduits shut down. As social 
capital is difficult to transfer, a founder’s death could shut down the flow of the 
corrupt funds and/or rents that were the sources of growth of the business. 
Recommendations
Governments should actively promote family-owned businesses in their own right, 
not as SMEs or private sector entities, given the very critical role they play in incubating 
and birthing new entrepreneurs and advancing economic growth. Governments 
should design and emplace appropriate policies, incentives and regulations to 
promote their growth and reduce their high mortality rates. Family-owned business-
specific data should be collected on a regular basis by national statistical offices to 
aid research and decision/policymaking. They should also consider establishing a 
market to trade in family-owned businesses as transfer of ownership could reduce 
the high mortality rate of these businesses. 
International trade is fundamental to the growth and survival of family-owned 
businesses. African governments should therefore assiduously implement the 
African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA) as an additional engine of business 
growth. They should improve economic management as the poor macroeconomic 
environment, especially the lack of foreign exchange, in many African countries, has 
adversely affected FOBs, especially those lacking expansive “social capital”. FOBs 
should be incentivized to list on secondary stock exchanges (where they exist) and 
engage in succession planning using tax waivers.
Family-owned businesses are real-world schools of entrepreneurship apprenticeship. 
Many entrepreneurial aspirations die, and the irreplaceable corpus of knowledge and 
experience is lost when a family-owned business ceases to exist. The death of a 
family-owned business is a significant loss for countries seeking to create a class 
of entrepreneurs to advance the frontiers of their development and transform their 
economies.
73VIEWPOINT
Accelerating productive MSMEs: 
The much-needed catalyst for 
Nigeria’s socio-economic recovery
Nigeria’s recent national growth plan and the new government’s New Hope Agenda 
highlight the opportunities that Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
create for the achievement of development objectives. As we look towards 2024, 
our belief at FATE Foundation is that Nigeria’s MSMEs can become the main drivers 
of economic recovery and inclusive growth only if there is a strong emphasis on 
enabling productive enterprises. 
2023 was a challenging year for Nigeria’s MSMEs. Despite the “green shoots” Nigeria 
experienced following the re-opening of the economy in 2021-22 after the pandemic, 
economic development in late 2022 and 2023 was negatively impacted by the flawed 
implementation of the Naira Redesign Policy, the impact of fuel subsidy removal 
which increased operational costs,  and the slowdown of economic activity due to 
the national and state-level elections.
In our 2023 State of Entrepreneurship Report which provides a reference point 
for policymakers to make data-driven decisions to promote entrepreneurship in 
Nigeria, we noted a deterioration in entrepreneurial performance
14 with over 90% of 
entrepreneurs surveyed indicating that the fuel subsidy removal had and continues 
to have a negative impact on their businesses. 
While they contribute over 90% to entrepreneurial activity in Nigeria and make up 
87.9% of the country’s labor force, over 90% of MSMEs are micro-enterprises with 
suboptimal productivity and low growth
15. When we apply a youth and gender lens, 
however, we do see some very bright spots. 
14  The FATE Institute. 2023.  State of Entrepreneurship in Nigeria. The FATE Institute, FATE Foundation.
15 SMEDAN AND NBS 2022. 2021 MSME Survey Report. The Small and Medium Enterprises Agency of Nigeria and the 
Nigerian Bureau of Statistics.
ADENIKE  
ADEYEMI
Executive Director,  
FATE Foundation
@Nike_Adeyemi
74 VIEWPOINT
Young people are the fastest growing age segment and those between the ages of 
15 to 29 account for 42% of MSME entrepreneurs. With high unemployment and 
underemployment rates being a challenge in Nigeria for that age category
16, it is 
encouraging to see more young people take on the opportunity of building their own 
economic pathways and creating a job for themselves through entrepreneurship. 
With business growth being one of our strong indicators of entrepreneurial 
performance, Women entrepreneurs—who make up 43% of MSME employees—
showed better productivity output as they  outperformed their male counterparts 
within that indicator level
17. 
16 The Nigerian Bureau of Statistics 2022. Nigerian Labor Force Survey Q2 2023. The Nigerian Bureau of Statistics. 
17 The FATE Institute. 2023.  State of Entrepreneurship in Nigeria. The FATE Institute, FATE Foundation.
FIGURE 9
NIGERIAN ENTREPRENEURS’ PERCEPTIONS OF OPPORTUNITY ARE FALLING
The State of Entrepreneurship survey defines the five pillars of entrepreneurship as perception of opportunities, 
innovation & digital technology adoption, business performance, skill acquisition, and an enabling business 
environment. Businesses are asked to score their perception of each pillar. Four of the five pillars declined relative 
to last year, demonstrating that business optimism and opportunity has fallen since 2022.
The State of Entrepreneurship (SoE) survey covered 10,377 businesses across all sectors and in Nigera’s 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory (FCT).
Source: The FATE Institute. 2023. The 2023 State of Entrepreneurship in Nigeria Report. https://fatefoundation.org/download/state-of-entrepreneurship-in-nige-
ria-2023-report/.
SCORE
PILLARS 2022 2023
Perception of opportunities 0.8 0.64
Innovation & digital technology adoption 0.55 0.58
Business performance 0.5 0.48
Skill acquisition 0.48 0.47
Enabling business environment 0.46 0.36
Overall index 0.58 0.52
75VIEWPOINT
In charting the pathway for a better Nigeria in 2024, the following are key policy 
priorities to stimulate the entrepreneurial ecosystem and enable inclusive and broad-
based growth for MSMEs. 
1. Changing measurement indicators for MSME investments to be age and gender 
disaggregated and reflect socio-economic impact e.g., decent jobs created, 
revenue growth, and ability to transition across segments (from micro to small 
or medium levels). 
2. Removing regulatory bottlenecks and harmonizing multiple taxation to galvanize 
business startup, growth and sustainability. Digitizing required regulatory 
processes and procedures and creating virtual and physical one-stop shops at 
Local Government levels (Nigeria has 774 LGAs) can enable this at scale. 
3. Accelerating the dual transition of youth and women led MSMEs (digital and 
green) to enhance their pathways to growth and improve their ability to attain 
entrepreneurial success. 
4. Domesticating the African Continental Free Trade Area agreement to improve 
Nigeria’s MSME competitiveness (currently at 47%
18)  and fast track their 
participation in regional and global trade.
Nigeria’s small and growing businesses need to be more productive in order to 
contribute effectively to the growth and development of the country. Support for 
MSMEs is critical for Nigeria to return to a path toward a prosperous, sustainable, 
and equitable economy. 
18 SMEDAN. 2023. MSME Competitiveness in Nigeria Report 2022. The Small and Medium Enterprise Development 
Agency of Nigeria.
Support for MSMEs 
is critical for Nigeria 
to return to a path 
toward a prosperous, 
sustainable, and 
equitable economy. 
76 VIEWPOINT
The future of African youth and 
women entrepreneurship and their 
roles in the region’s economy
Sometimes it seems like everywhere we turn these days we hear talk of Africa’s 
youth demography and the latent economic potential therein. This is consistent 
with the “African renaissance”, “Africa rising,” and “lions on the move” narratives 
variously championed by African politicians, international media, and various 
institutions, financial and otherwise, since the end of the last millennium. These 
narratives have been fueled by the end of the Cold War, rapid globalization, the 
transformations brought on by advances in telecommunications and technology, 
a deepening of political democracies across the continent, and a hunger for 
new investment opportunities by international private and public investors. The 
telecommunications and financial sectors and consumer booms of the earlier 
2000s served as further proof points. In October 2023, the New York Times wrote 
about the African “Youthquake.”
Beneath these collective narratives though, lies a complex and multidimensional 
reality that is 54 countries and economies potentially unified more by their 
challenges than their successes. 
With dwindling opportunities in the public sector and limited opportunities in 
the private sector over the past decades, African youth have increasingly turned 
to entrepreneurship to create their own income and employment opportunities. 
Young people are venturing into industries ranging from technology, music and 
entertainment, agriculture, fashion, and renewable energy and becoming more 
mobile. With advancements in technology and access to information, some young 
entrepreneurs are leveraging digital platforms and social media to reach wider 
markets both domestically and internationally like never before. Within this growth, 
women entrepreneurship outside of traditional cultural roles is also on the rise. 
However, the full potential of this demographic profile and mobility will not be met 
if  appropriate investments are not made in the building blocks of our economies. 
The enabling conditions, which are sorely lacking, include significant deficits in 
the hard and soft infrastructure which underpin modern economic growth and 
prosperity. The quality of health, education, and productivity for most women and 
youth continues to undermine their potential. Women continue to be restricted to 
low margin production and labor-intensive sectors with limited mobility and access 
to markets. Access to new technologies is constrained by the huge dearth in the 
anchoring infrastructure, notably power, transportation, and communication. 
ZOUERA  
YOUSSOUFOU
Managing Director 
and CEO, Aliko 
Dangote Foundation 
Zakari Momodu
@Zouera
ZAKARI  
MOMODU
Projects Director, 
Aliko Dangote 
Foundation
77VIEWPOINT
So how will we reap this demographic dividend? By investing in:
1. Education : The general lack of affordable and accessible quality education 
hampers the skills and knowledge that are relevant for the labor market and 
enterprise. This reduces employability and earnings, and limits innovation and 
entrepreneurship. All the studies and empirical evidence demonstrate that 
education increases women’s agency thereby delaying premature marriage and 
childbearing and improving nutrition outcomes and prevention of disease, and 
as a result, reducing maternal and child mortality.
2. Power : Affordable electricity is a foundational building block of any economy. 
Energy is critical to all productive activities and innovation and more so for 
climate and environmental health and technological advances. 
3. Infrastructure: Especially roads, connect people, resources, and information. 
From providing physical access to markets, customers, suppliers, to reducing 
transportation and transaction costs. Roads and other transport and 
communication infrastructure are the arteries of the economy, facilitating 
innovation, specialization, and competitiveness across the continent. 
And so, herein lies the potential for investment and significant returns for governments 
and private (individual and institutional) investors determined enough to tackle them. 
The demand side is there. The supply is either lacking, too timid, or inconsistent.
Power: Affordable 
electricity is a 
foundational 
building block of any 
economy.
And so, herein lies 
the potential for 
investment and 
significant returns 
for governments and 
private (individual 
and institutional) 
investors determined 
enough to tackle 
them. The demand 
side is there. The 
supply is either 
lacking, too timid, or 
inconsistent.
78 VIEWPOINT
Nurturing entrepreneurial  
scaling in Africa
In recent years, Africa has emerged as a hub for high-growth entrepreneurship. Since 
2019, seven tech unicorns have come out of the continent, including from Nigeria, 
Senegal, Ghana, and Egypt. 19 With a large regional market of over 1.4 billion people 
and local market inefficiencies that are ripe for entrepreneurial solutions, it is no 
wonder that Africa is on the startup map.
But we know that it is not enough to have a hub. These hubs need to nurture 
entrepreneurial scaling to realize the economic, innovation, and job growth benefits 
of entrepreneurship. And doing so requires venture capital, market access, and 
talent.
20 Getting these resources is not easy. For example, investors will hesitate to 
deploy capital if their investments are at risk in countries that have low public trust 
and high governance issues. Successfully navigating regional markets requires the 
right expertise to address cross-border challenges. Cultivating and nurturing digital 
talent is contingent on robust educational programs. For this reason, strengthening 
institutions and building the capacity of local entrepreneurs and investors are critical 
to unleash the full potential of Africa’s entrepreneurial ecosystem. 
Strengthening institutions 
Building and strengthening institutions is critical to shifting the mindset of 
policymakers to embrace entrepreneurship while reducing barriers for entrepreneurs 
to grow their startups and investors to fuel that growth. And they require champions 
to truly make an impact, whether it be new offices dedicated to the digital economy, 
such as the Digital Transformation Office in the Ministry of Agriculture in Kenya, or 
an existing office, for example, under the Ministry of Economy. 
To cut the red tape for entrepreneurs to start and grow their businesses, regulatory 
reforms may simplify intricate business registration procedures. They can direct the 
creation of innovation hubs—as is being considered in Ghana— to make it easier 
for startups to reach key stakeholders in their ecosystem, whether it be corporate 
customers, suppliers, or talent. Further, encouraging entrepreneurship education at 
schools and universities can contribute to a new generation of entrepreneurs. 
To encourage investment, governments can offer tax incentives, such as breaks 
for angel investors and tax holidays for startups. They can also establish funding 
vehicles to stimulate the investor ecosystem more directly. For example, through 
establishing venture capital funds of funds and startup loan guarantees.
19 Crunchbase. 2023. “Unicorn Company List”.
20 Conti, A., & Guzman, J. A. 2023. “What is the US comparative advantage in entrepreneurship? Evidence from Israeli 
migration to the United States. Review of Economics and Statistics” 105(3), 528-544.
LESL Y GOH
Senior Technology 
Advisor, World Bank
@Leslygoh
NATALIYA 
LANGBURD  
WRIGHT
Assistant Professor of 
Business, Columbia 
Business School
@LangburdWright
79VIEWPOINT
Building local entrepreneurial and investor capacity
Nonetheless, institutions alone are not enough. The capacity of entrepreneurs and 
investors dictates whether current or potential entrepreneurs can pursue and grow 
technological and market opportunities even in seamless institutional environments. 
Silicon Valley, with decades of experience in starting and growing companies, has 
amassed a wealth of knowledge that supports future entrepreneurs. And this 
knowledge can be particularly valuable for startups in hubs like in Africa that need to 
make the most of limited resources. But building such knowledge in a homegrown 
way in Africa takes time and money that might just not be possible. So, what else 
is possible? Leapfrogging knowledge flows through targeted programs is essential. 
These include:
• Building entrepreneurial capacity:  Targeted educational programs led by 
international accelerators like MassChallenge, Techstars, and Y Combinator 
provide entrepreneurs with the expertise to build and grow startups. They 
choose and help build successful startups that can attract investors .
21 Further, 
exchange programs like National University of Singapore Overseas College 
(NOC) enable potential and current entrepreneurs to work in places abroad like 
Silicon Valley, learn the startup ethos, and come back to apply this knowledge in 
local entrepreneurial endeavors.
• Building investor capacity: Investors are an important part of a local ecosystem. 
It is not enough to have investors with people, but those with expertise to provide 
the added value to startups that is crucial to help them grow. Local investors have 
a unique knowledge of the local market base that can help entrepreneurs find 
tailored opportunities and bridge resource gaps that they might otherwise face 
because of foreign discounting.
22 But this local knowledge needs a generalized 
counterpart—how to balance finances, find and advance talent, and connect 
the startups to expand strategically in international markets. Training programs 
for investors like MEST and TECA create a multiplier effect by co-investing with 
international investors to foster a powerful learning opportunity.
The combination of entrepreneurial and investor capacity means that startups will 
have the expertise to kickstart and grow their company while making efficient use of 
their limited resources with positive spillovers for other firms. For instance, the thriving 
FinTech ecosystem in Kenya is creating a vibrant digital platform for AgTech offering a 
variety of solutions to smallholder farmers from the on-farm to the off-farm value chain.
Tapping Africa’s entrepreneurial potential is an enormous opportunity. Doing so 
requires building an enabling environment that can harness investment, nurture local 
talent, and enable market access.
21 Gonzalez-Uribe, J., & Leatherbee, M. 2018. “The effects of business accelerators on venture performance: Evidence 
from Start-up Chile”. The Review of Financial Studies. 31(4), 1566-1603.
22 Wright, N. L., Koning, R., & Khanna, T. 2023. “Judging foreign startups”. Strategic Management Journal.
Tapping Africa’s 
entrepreneurial 
potential is 
an enormous 
opportunity. Doing so 
requires building an 
enabling environment 
that can harness 
investment, nurture 
local talent, and 
enable market 
access.
80 VIEWPOINT
Getting the value out  
of venture capital
Africa’s leapfrogging in sectors such as mobile money and mini-grids is well-
documented. With the emergence of electric vehicles, satellite internet, and artificial 
intelligence, an abundance of leapfrog opportunities are on the horizon for venture 
capital investors.
However, Africa’s venture-backed unicorns including ChipperCash, Jumia, and Swvl, 
have struggled to maintain their unicorn status, while rising stars have faced layoffs 
and down-rounds.
23,24,25,26,27 This volatile environment negatively impacts customers, 
jobs, and the ecosystem. If the next generation of African unicorns are to last, venture 
capitalists must shift away from demanding rapid, exponential growth and favor 
paced profitability as the model of success. 
Rethinking economies of scale
The venture capital model hinges on the principle that scale equates to value. 
Investing in new markets for customer growth, and in tech for operational efficiency 
is the formula to create a large, marketable business. However, applying these 
premises to the African context can be misleading.
Africa is far from operating like a single economic zone. Expanding across borders 
often necessitates new bank and telco partnerships, customized application 
programming interfaces (APIs), separate logistics partners, and new taxes, licenses, 
and currency risk. Add in the diversity of customer behavior and language and 
achieving scale becomes far from straightforward.
23 Forbes Africa. (2023, August 18). Inside Chipper Cash’s Grueling Battle to Survive the Fintech Winter. Forbes Africa. 
24 The Wall Street Journal. (2023). Market Data. 
25 The Wall Street Journal. (2023). Market Data. 
26 TechCrunch. (2023, August 21). Twiga disbands in-house delivery.
27 TechCrunch. (2023, May 31). MarketForce forced to tighten its belt as tough times hit. TechCrunch. 
SABRINA  
DORMAN
Co-founder and 
CFO, ZUMI
If the next generation 
of African unicorns 
are to last, venture 
capitalists must 
shift away from 
demanding rapid, 
exponential growth 
and favor paced 
profitability as the 
model of success.
81VIEWPOINT
Moreover, operational efficiency from scaling technology is not a given. African 
customers often prefer tech products that are complimented by human interaction 
because it fosters trust. Business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce players depend 
on sales agent networks to stay top of mind with their customers and fintech players 
utilize agent banking as a core part of their service.
28 Plus, the African ecosystem 
is so nascent that startups must develop it as they grow, whether by purchasing 
their own logistics fleets, or acquiring financial licenses, or even establishing their 
own utility.
29,30
Scaling in African venture-backed tech is complex and carries the risk of 
inadvertently creating an operationally burdened and less attractive business.
Prioritizing resilience over speed
The venture capital model also places emphasis on speed. Capital injections are 
expected to graduate a company to the next funding round within 18 months. 
However, African businesses operate in environments where economic shocks 
constantly disrupt well-laid plans. Kenya, during the period of 2017-2022, provides 
a case in point.
The 2017 presidential election brought commerce to a halt for a year, as 
businesses shied away from investing until the contested results were known. 
Severe droughts and locust infestations over multiple seasons left millions food-
insecure and depressed consumer demand.
31 The sudden introduction of a digital 
services tax and fluctuations in fuel levy policy added to the turbulent business 
environment. 
On top of domestic shocks, external events brought more volatility. The change 
in the U.S. federal funds rate and the Ukraine conflict resulted in capital flight, 
currency depreciation, rising fuel and food costs, and inflation. Such frequent 
shocks mean that African businesses cannot plan too far ahead and must 
constantly adapt.
28  Vox. (2020, September 11). What Kenya can teach its neighbors — and the US — about improving the lives of the 
“unbanked” Vox. 
29 The Flip. (2022, March 15). Wasoko: Powering the Last Mile. The Flip. https://theflip.africa/newsletter/wasoko-power -
ing-last-mile-retail Rwanda Development Board. (2022, March 22). Rwanda signs agreement with KOKO to establish 
$25 million renewable cooking fuel utility. 
30 Rwanda Development Board. (2022, March 22). Rwanda signs agreement with KOKO to establish $25 million renew-
able cooking fuel utility. 
31 World Bank. (2017, December 6). Kenya’s GDP Growth Slumps in 2017 but Can Rebound Over the Medium Term. 
82
VIEWPOINT
FIGURE 10
SOUTH AFRICAN ENTREPRENEURS ARE DRIVING THE INCREASE IN PATENTS FILED ON THE 
CONTINENT (1980 - 2021)
Entrepreneurship and innovation are two indispensable drivers of economic growth. African governments have 
made a concerted effort to invest in innovation in their countries, a reality that is reflected not only in the rising 
number of patents filed by Africans, but also by the rising share of such patents that are filed in Africa (as opposed 
to abroad). A significant share of patents historically and even now are filed by South African entrepreneurs.
Source: World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).
6,000
5,500
5,000
4,500
4,000
3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
PATENTS PER YEAR
FLOW OF PATENTS FILED BY AFRICANS (EXCLUDING SOUTH AFRICA)
6,000
5,500
5,000
4,500
4,000
3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
NUMBER OF PATENTS FILED PER YEAR
FLOW OF PATENTS FILED BY AFRICANS
FILED IN FOREIGN OFFICE FILED IN AFRICA
83VIEWPOINT
In this context, the traditional venture capital formula falters. Capital meant for fast 
growth often absorbs shocks instead. Resilience becomes the key to capturing 
return on investment. Investors and entrepreneurs must align on long-term 
value. The potential for resilience is evident in startups across sectors that have 
demonstrated consistent growth in value through several economic cycles, such 
as MFS Africa, Interswitch, Victory Farms, mPharma, and KOKO Networks.
32,33,34,35,36
By opting for a growth rate that does not significantly outstrip profitability, a venture 
can establish self-reliance, and the ability to withstand economic shocks without 
being at the mercy of external capital.
Establishing the next generation
Venture capital’s “spray-and-pray” strategy, which bets on one billion-dollar unicorn 
out of many initial investments, is not suitable for Africa. A formula that prioritizes 
slower but more likely-to-succeed ventures offers better returns on investment.
Development finance institutions (DFIs) are the largest investors in African venture 
capital via funds of funds. Germany’s DEG, The UK’s CDC, France’s PROPARCO, Norway’s 
NORFUND plus the International Finance Corporation (IFC), European Development 
Bank, and others committed $80 billion for Africa over five years.
37 To truly fulfill their 
commitment of fostering job creation and economic independence, DFIs should adopt 
a sustainable funding philosophy, akin to that which family offices such as CreaDev 
and seed funds such as Future Africa have come to embrace from experience building 
businesses on the continent.
38,39 Long-term investment partners can better assess 
growth in relation to sustainability. Structuring funds to allow for capital infusions at 
multiple stages of a venture’s maturity will vastly increase the odds of a viable exit. 
If African investors can shift this paradigm, the valuable businesses they create will 
in turn become investors in their own ecosystem and nurture the next generation of 
African unicorns.
32 How We Made It In Africa. (2023, August 26). Making Borders Matter Less: How MFS Africa Created A Digital 
Payment Network. 
33 INterswithc. (2023). New Milestone Alert. 
34 Africa.com. (2023, April 6). Victory Farm Poised for Further Growth After $35m Series B Drive.
35 Tech Crunch (2022, January 5). mPharma Raises $35 million.
36 Financial Times. (2023, August 15). Start-up taps carbon markets to boost clean cooking in Africa. 
37 African Development Bank Group. (2021, June 14). G7 Development Finance Institutions and multilateral partners to 
invest over $80 billion into African businesses over the next five years.
38 Creadev. (n.d.). Approach. 
39 Future Africa. Fund II in Review - February 2023. 
84 VIEWPOINT
How companies integrate 
smallholder farmers in their value 
chains in Africa
More than half of Africa’s 1.3 billion people make a living from agriculture, of whom 
80% are low-income smallholder farmers working on farms smaller than two 
hectares.
40 Significantly reducing poverty requires substantial improvements in the 
productive capacity and market access of millions of smallholder farmers in Africa.
In recent years, large food and beverage companies have introduced initiatives that 
integrate smallholder farmers into their value chains.  These efforts are driven by 
the goals of increasing quality raw material supply, diversifying geographic risk, and 
empowering smallholder farmers economically and socially.
Heineken, a Dutch brewery, has launched a supply chain project in Ethiopia to increase 
local sourcing of malt barley in its breweries. The project has provided agronomic 
training, farming inputs, and market access to more than 40,000 smallholder 
farmers. These interventions helped double farm yields, leading to an estimated USD 
59 million incremental increase in farmer revenues.
41 
Nando’s, a South African casual dining chain, has successfully developed a 
smallholder farmer value chain for one of its key ingredients, peri-peri chili. For ten 
years now, the initiative has reached thousands of farmers  in Zimbabwe, Malawi, 
and Mozambique, supplying 100% of its peri-peri demand.
42 Currently, the project 
includes 724 farmers who earn an average income of USD 955 per year—significantly 
greater than income earned from alternative crops.
43  
How to develop inclusive value chains that  
create impact for smallholder farmers 
Integrating smallholders into large value chains can be difficult. The successful 
experience of Heineken and Nando’s, however, provides valuable insights on 
how to create truly “inclusive” value chains. The following three insights are 
particularly relevant. 
40 Suri, Taveneet, and Christopher Udry. 2022. “Agricultural technology in Africa.” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives, 36(1), 33-56. 
41 IFC. 2023. “Working with Smallholders: A handbook for firms building sustainable supply chains (Third Edition).” World 
Bank Group. 
42 Nandos. “The People Behind the Peri-Peri.” 
43 Lashitew, A. Addisu, and Annika Surmeier. 2024. “Responsible governance in inclusive value chains: Lessons from the 
Peri Farms Project of Nando’s.” Graduate School of Business working paper, the University of Cape Town.
ADDISU  
LASHITEW
Nonresident Fellow, 
Global Economy 
and Development, 
Brookings Institution
@AddisuLashitew
TANNER  
METHVIN
Director,  
Earth Capital and 
Partner, Impact 
Amplifier 
ANNIKA  
SURMEIER
Senior Lecturer, 
Graduate School 
of Business of the 
University of  
Cape Town
@annika_surmeier
Integrating 
smallholders into 
large value chains 
can be difficult. The 
successful experience 
of Heineken and 
Nando’s, however, 
provides valuable 
insights on how to 
create truly “inclusive” 
value chains.
85VIEWPOINT
1. Ensure that inclusive value chain initiatives contribute to strategic objectives 
Building inclusive value chains is complex and time-consuming. Such initiatives 
are more likely to enjoy sustained corporate-wide backing when they are aligned 
with strategic objectives. 
A critical factor behind the success of the Nando’s project was its focus on securing 
a safe and reliable supply of peri-peri chili, which is deeply intertwined with the 
company’s history and brand identity. By sourcing peri-peri from African farmers, 
Nando’s was able to build connections between its global workforce and African 
roots. This enabled the initiative to garner sustained support from the company’s 
procurement, marketing, and HR teams in the face of multifaceted challenges.
Heineken was motivated by the desire to develop a reliable supply of local malt while 
meaningfully contributing to local economic development.  This created ample 
commitment for investing in a complex initiative that has lasted several years.  
2. Partner with organizations with distinct expertise and context-relevant 
knowledge
Both Heineken and Nando’s collaborated with different partner organizations, 
selected for their specialized expertise and context-relevant knowledge. Heineken 
worked closely with local consultancy firms and microfinance institutions to 
understand the needs of farmers and provide them with credit services. Nando’s 
maintained an intense collaboration with Impact Amplifier—a consultancy 
specializing in social impact—and several implementing partners in Malawi, 
Mozambique, and Zimbabwe that provided agronomy training, aggregated chili 
harvests, and coordinated post-harvest processes.
44  
3. Devise solutions that reduce transaction costs in the value chain 
Smallholder farmers are often considered ill-suited for industrial-scale 
procurement because they lack robust quality controls and can be more 
expensive than commercial farmers due to production and distributional 
inefficiencies. Nando’s addressed these issues by picking a crop that is 
labor-intensive, which allowed smallholder farmers to compete on price with 
commercial farms. By using local partners to aggregate peri-peri chili, manage 
post-harvest handling, and introduce traceability controls, they streamlined 
quality control and eliminated logistical inefficiencies. Likewise, Heineken 
worked closely with the International Finance Corporation to provide training 
with the aim of developing the agronomy and business skills of its partners. 
These programs reached dozens of farmer intermediaries (farmers’ unions 
and cooperatives) who aggregated inputs and outputs across thousands of 
smallholder farmers. 
44 Impact Amplifier. “Building Resilience and Impact Assessments.” 
86 VIEWPOINT
Conclusion
The experiences of Heineken and Nando’s demonstrate that inclusive value chains, 
while not a panacea, can go a long way toward improving the living standards 
of impoverished farmers. Designing inclusive value chains requires changing 
corporate systems, which takes commitment, time, and experience. It also 
requires sustained partnerships to develop new capabilities, secure local support, 
and build trust. To create inclusive value chains that truly benefit smallholder 
farmers, companies need the willingness to challenge themselves, to develop new 
capabilities, and to reevaluate how they define value.   
FIGURE 11
DECOMPOSITION OF LABOR PRODUCTIVITY BY REGION AND SECTORAL GROUP (1990 - 2018) 
Sub-Saharan Africa experienced significant improvements to labor productivity over the last three decades, averaging 
4.4% growth per year. To understand the drivers of productivity growth, it is disaggregated into within-sector growth 
and between-sector growth (or growth from labor reallocation). There has been mass reallocation of labor from 
agriculture into services and rapid within-sector productivity growth in the agricultural sector.
Note: Sectors from the Economic Transformation Database were divided as follows: Construction, mining, and utilities were classified under "Industry," and trade, 
transport, business, financial, government, and other, services, as well as real estate were classified under "Services." Agriculture and manufacturing are defined 
by their ISIC Rev. 4 codes "A" and "C" respectively. Design inspired by Nayyar et al (2021).
Source: Heitzig and Newfarmer. 2023. "Africa: Growth beyond deindustrialization?" The International Growth Centre.
WITHIN-SECTOR AGRICUL TURE
REALLOCATION FROM AGRICUL TURE TO INDUSTRY (EXCL. MANUFACTURING)
REALLOCATION FROM AGRICUL TURE TO SERVICES REALLOCATION FROM AGRICUL TURE TO MANUFACTURING
WITHIN-SECTOR MANUFACTURINGWITHIN-SECTOR INDUSTRY (EXCL MANUFACTURING)WITHIN-SECTOR SERVICES
BETWEEN-SECTOR
WITHIN-SECTOR
BETWEEN-SECTOR
WITHIN-SECTOR
BETWEEN-SECTOR
WITHIN-SECTOR
BETWEEN-SECTOR
WITHIN-SECTOR
BETWEEN-SECTOR
WITHIN-SECTOR
-1,0% 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5% 6%
AVERAGE ANNUAL GROWTH IN PRODUCTIVITY
SUB-SAHARAN
AFRICA
SOUTH ASIA
MIDDLE EAST &
NORTH AFRICA
LATIN AMERICA
& CARIBBEAN
EAST ASIA
& PACIFIC
87VIEWPOINT
Leveraging innovativeness of 
Africa’s youth through startups
Today, according to the World Bank’s classification, 31 out of 54 African countries 
outgrew the low-income category. 45 These countries accounted for more than 80%  
of the continent’s GDP in 2023, according to the IMF estimates from the World 
Economic Database. To escape the so-called middle-income trap, countries need 
to shift their growth drivers from efficiency to innovation. Today, African MICs 
as a group are characterized by their potential, but also by limited capacities for 
innovation and creation of productive and green jobs. 
The creation of productive jobs is the continent’s key priority as it will determine 
whether Africa will utilize its demographic opportunity. Currently, about 60% of 
Africa’s population are below the age of 25. The UN projections indicate that by 
2050, Africa will account for more than 25% of the world’s population. This trend 
brings both enormous opportunities and challenges. While education attainments 
in Africa have been improving, the labor market outcomes are less impressive, with 
high youth unemployment prevailing in several middle-income countries and high 
working poverty in low-income countries. 
For a large number of Africa’s high-potential youth, entrepreneurship, through 
startups, offers not only a chance to build sustainable livelihoods and even wealth 
but also to integrate into society. Many policy dimensions were discussed at the 
Africa Startups conference in Algiers December 2023. Below are policy options for 
boosting African startups. 
Address access to finance:  
A fund of funds to improve start-up financing 
Beyond mobilizing additional finances, creating an African fund of funds, that 
is African fund investing in other funds that fund start-ups, can de-risk start-up 
financing by spreading out the overall funding into many different venture capital 
funds. This approach could draw in more risk averse investors and even attract 
substantial funding from the governments and thus become an effective tool of 
industrial or other type of public policy. It could incentivize start-ups to strive to 
address major societal issues such as climate change or gender inequality while 
tackling Africa’s specific needs.
45 For the 2023-2024 fiscal year, the World Bank defines middle income countries as those with GNI per capita (the Atlas 
method) were between 11,36 USD and 13,845 USD in 2022. 
ZUZANA  
BRIXIOVA  
SCHWIDROWSKI
Director of the North 
Africa Office, United 
Nations Economic 
Commission for Africa 
(UNECA)
@ZSchwidrowski
 ZOUBIR  
BENHANMOUCHE
Economist, UNECA 
88 VIEWPOINT
The fund could encourage the sharing of knowledge and skills across African 
countries, thus strengthening the startup landscape. It would stimulate African 
startups to grow, tackling the “missing middle” and the prevalence of small firms in 
key sectors, including manufacturing. In short, such funds for African startups could 
be an influential investment for the future of Africa, powering up its businesses to 
drive strong, connected, and lasting growth while also aligning the private sector 
with government objectives.
Turn youth brain drain into brain circulation  
through Africa startup visa
To become knowledge economies with a conducive climate for startups, African 
countries need to tap into their talent abroad through diaspora networks. Countries of 
origin can reap benefits in several ways, including through the transfer of knowledge 
and capital. A start-up/innovation visa can be one of the tools for turning brain drain 
into brain circulation. Start-ups initiated by diaspora and/or joint ventures between non-
residents and residents could help strengthen the rule of law, and business climate and 
eventually create an environment where incentives to migration are less pronounced.
More broadly, African startup visa would let entrepreneurs from all over the world start 
firms in Africa, with a view to generate innovative business ideas. So far, adoption of this 
regime has been limited, even though some countries (Algeria, South Africa, Tunisia, 
Botswana, and Nigeria) are considering it. South Africa is currently in the process of 
finalizing ‘tech visa’, with the aim to attract international tech talent and support
46 start-
up tech ecosystem. Given its flourishing tech scene, a startup visa in Kenya could 
bolster its position as a leader in African tech innovation. 
Boost startups through information generation and sharing
Access to information, on markets, policies and regulations, technology etc., is key 
for startups. An “Africa startups platform” could be impactful in this regard as it 
would provide startups with fast and reliable information on African economies with 
relevant indicators, regulations, and policies. It would also provide united start-up 
database with information on existing startups that could be relevant both for other 
or aspiring startups, investors, and policymakers.
An African Startups Business Conditions Index, based on regular surveys of startups 
in Africa, would help policymakers to recognize the obstacles startup face and their 
needs, and how they view policies. This index would facilitate design of appropriate 
policies, harmonize them at the continental level and improve business environment. 
It would also shed light on factors driving high start-up exit rates. 
46 Agence Francaise de Development. 2019. “Appropriate funding to support African digital start-ups and their ecosystems”. 
Access to 
information, on 
markets, policies 
and regulations, 
technology etc., is key 
for startups.
89VIEWPOINT
Climate tech startups can contribute  
to addressing climate crisis47
Climate change mitigation and adaptation are pivotal areas where African countries 
can launch joint R&D projects, fostering an ecosystem of startups around continental 
climate innovation. The challenges and opportunities presented by climate change 
are particularly poignant for African startups due to the continent’s vulnerability, 
stemming from its geographical and economic circumstances. Startups face 
numerous challenges, including the impact of climate change on agriculture, 
operational disruptions, and financial constraints. However, these challenges are 
matched by opportunities: the demand for innovative solutions to climate-related 
issues, the shift towards green technology, access to climate finance, the ability to 
influence policy, and the creation of jobs in new, sustainable sectors.
Joint climate research initiatives, cross-border innovation in renewable energy, shared 
resources for sustainability projects, and climate-resilient agricultural technologies 
are just a few areas where collaborative R&D can be transformative. Furthermore, 
data sharing for climate modeling and prediction, networking, access to pan-African 
and global markets, and capacity building, are critical for this cooperative approach.
Amplified and focused African voice  
in global economic forums 
Collaboration with the African Union will be critical for success of the start-up agenda. 
The AU has gained a seat at the G20 (G21), which could be utilized for presenting 
Africa’s interests in a focused and coordinated way at the G20 to ensure that Africa’s 
start-up initiative receives adequate support. 
47 Gitahi, W. 2023. “The Catalyst Fund: Championing climate tech innovation in Africa.”
90 VIEWPOINT
FIGURE 12
EVOLUTION OF SERVICES AND MANUFACTURING (1990 - 2018)
Unlike the northeasterly flow of the bubble chart for services, the manufacturing sector has a more irregular 
pattern. Rwanda, Zambia, Senegal, and Kenya have moved generally southeast, suggesting that manufacturing's 
employment share is rising but its value-added share is falling. This trend suggests that the manufacturing 
sector's productivity is falling. The manufacturing sector in South Africa has experienced a drop in its share in 
both employment and value added, suggesting manufacturing is playing a smaller role in South Africa's economy 
over time. The manufacturing sector's performance in Africa over the last several decades has raised questions 
about the future of manufacturing in Africa's economic growth, concerns of deindustrialization, and renewed 
efforts to articulate new national and regional industrial strategies.
The larger the dot, the more recent the year.
Source Heitzig and Newfarmer. 2023. "Africa: Growth beyond deindustrialization?" The International Growth Centre.
KENYA
RWANDA
SENEGAL
SOUTH AFRICA
UGANDA
ZAMBIA
GHANA
ETHIOPIA
EVOLUTION OF MANUFACTURING 1990 TO 2018
EVOLUTION OF SERVICES 1990 TO 2018
0%
2%
0%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
22%
24%
2% 4% 6% 8% 10% 12% 14% 16%1% 3% 5% 7% 9% 11% 13% 15%
Value added share in manufacturing
KENYA
RWANDA
SENEGAL
SOUTH AFRICA
GHANA
ETHIOPIA
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
55%
60%
ZAMBIA
UGANDA
Value added share in services
91
VIEWPOINT