Would you like to be President of Nigeria?

Some of us, we need to lead in terms of the trajectory of the growth in Africa through business, not through political leadership.

Are there good investment opportunities for non-Africans in Africa?

Well, there are good opportunities for everybody, you know, and I think that's protection also for everybody.

So the Arsenal team, is that a team that you would like to buy someday?

It is a team that, yes, you might like to buy, you know, someday.

Would you fix your tie, please?

Well, people wouldn't recognize me if my tie was fixed. Just leave it this way. All right.

I don't consider myself a journalist, and nobody else would consider myself a journalist. I began to take on the life of being an interviewer even though I have a day job running a private equity firm. How do you define leadership? What is it that makes somebody tick?

Aliko Dangote is widely known to be the wealthiest man in Africa. So is that a title you're proud to have, or is that one where you get so many people calling you for money, you wish you weren't the wealthiest man in Africa?

Well, first of all, thank you very much, David. It's great to be here, you know, and also seeing you today. Well, you know, when they call you... I mean, wealthiest person in Africa, you know, it comes with a lot of baggage. Of course, there are so many demands, yeah, and white people now come up with so many different, you know, demands. But it is good, because I'd like to give back to the society.

So right now, you are involved in many philanthropic endeavors in Africa and elsewhere. Let's go through some of them before we go to how you actually made all of this money. So recently, you had an event in New York, where we are now, with Mo Ibrahim, also a wealthy African businessperson, and Bill Gates, in which you provided a fair amount of money for the Africa Center in New York, in Harlem. What is the Africa Center, and why did you do that?

Well, we did... the Africa Center idea started... was, you know, Chelsea Clinton had, you know, Mo Ibrahim and my daughter, Halima. My daughter Halima joined them later, and we realized that, look, we need to set up this Africa Center. We need to make it a... you know, a reality, first of all, you know, for us to be able to project Africa in a better light, you know, bringing Africa to the rest of the world, you know, especially when you look at, you know, the fabric of every September, we have the United Nations General Assembly where the entire world converges in New York. And what we want to do is to tell the real narrative of Africa, and tell the rest of the world what Africa is all about. So this has now to do with policy, business, and culture, you know, because sometimes, you know, the... I mean, especially, you know, Americans, literally understand not much about Africa, you know. Somebody will say, "Okay, well, both you Africans, you know, what kind of language do you speak?" For example, in Africa, we speak about 2,000 different languages. That's a lot, that's a lot.

So right now, one of the big problems in Africa is health, and you've been very involved in trying to eradicate polio in Nigeria along with Bill Gates and his foundation. What is the progress that you've made today?

I think we've done quite a lot. The... you know, the progress has been very, very tremendous. In the last three years, we haven't really had any wild, you know, virus of polio, and hopefully, when we work hard between the next six months by April, we'll be certified to be a polio-free country, which means the entire African continent will be polio-free.

Now, one of the things you're doing in the philanthropic world is building a hospital in Nigeria. Why do you feel a need to build a new hospital?

I think we need to build a world-class hospital, because when you look at it, in Nigeria, we spend quite a lot of money where a lot of people go abroad for medical checkup, for medical operations. Then what we are trying to do is to give the hope to the population and say that, look, you don't need to travel abroad; we'll be able to treat you.

Now, for those who may not be familiar with Africa, Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa, is that right?

It is, and it's growing at a very large rate in terms of its population.

Is that now about 200 plus million people? So at the current rate, at some point, more people will be in Nigeria than in the United States?

Well, by 2050, we'll be at about 450 million population, and I'm sure we will be way ahead of the US. We'll be about number three after China, India, and then it'll be Nigeria in terms of... By 2050, we could be the third biggest country at the current population growth rate.

So does that make you nervous about whether Nigeria can house and feed all these people?

Uh, it doesn't really make me nervous. We have massive arable land, we have a lot of water, we have, you know, the right climate. So when you look at it, the major contributor to our GDP in Nigeria is agriculture. So I think we just need to tilt a bit and change from the normal oil, you know, reliant economy to agriculture and manufacturing.

So Nigeria is known as well for having large oil deposits. Is that the major contributor to the Nigerian economy? Is that the major source of wealth in Nigeria?

It's not the major source, but it is... it continues to be 90 percent of the foreign exchange, you know, that, you know, we have, and also 60 percent of the government's revenue is also coming from oil. But I think the government is doing quite a lot to try and diversify the economy by trying to structure their own taxes, because we need to make more money from the taxes. Tax generation in Nigeria is a bit low, so I think government is working very hard to make sure that, yes, they adjust all these.

Now, the wealthiest man in Africa and the wealthiest man in Nigeria, do you get pressure to run for political office yourself? Would you like to be President of Nigeria?

I think I'm doing a great job where I am right now, so I don't think I need to be in a political space. Some of us, we need to lead in terms of the trajectory of the growth in Africa through the business, not through the political leadership.

Let's talk about how you made this amount of money, which is by far the largest amount of money that any individual has in Africa. So, did you come from a wealthy family, or not a wealthy family?

I came from a wealthy family. My late great-grandfather in the 1940s was actually the richest in West Africa. My late grandfather was one of the wealthiest Nigerians. The family name is Dantata, that's from my maternal side. My father, too, you know, was fairly rich, you know, but he was both in business and also in politics. But you know, David, one thing that I'm very, very proud of is that I did not inherit any money from my father. I built everything from scratch.

Your father died when you were relatively young?

Yeah, he died when I was 8 years old.

So he didn't leave in his will a large amount of money for you?

Well, he left in the will, but, you know, I mean, whatever that I inherited from him, which means in assets, I gave that... went to charity since then.

Okay. So did you go to college in Nigeria?

No, I went to Egypt.

Egypt, all right. And what did you study?

Business.

All right. So you graduated at what age?

I graduated at about 20 years old.

All right. So you went back from Egypt to Nigeria?

Yes.

And then what, did you get a job? What did you do?

I started work with my uncle for a few months, and then I went to Lagos and now I started my own business, but just, you know, buying cement and selling. You know, it was just a very low-key business.

All right. So you're 20, 21 years old, you're buying cement, you're a trader.

You know, trading, yes. You're making sure that you're trading it, and I was trading at that time.

Now, cement is your main business, we'll talk about it in a moment, but why is cement such a big part of Africa's, you know, wealth?

Well, you know, the issue is that when you look at cement, cement is what builds infrastructure, and we have a lot of infrastructure deficit. In Nigeria alone, we have about 17,000 deficit of housing, and it is all over in, you know, Africa. So when we started cement in Nigeria, we realized that majority of it was actually imported, and that is why we went in there. We started, and it's a long story.

So you ultimately were trading cement, and then was it hard to get the money to keep that business going?

No, it wasn't really hard at that time. I was buying cement locally. We started importation in 1980, because I started business in '78. So by 1980, we started importing sugar, rice, you know, commodities generally, and then we stopped the cement business because the cement, I was actually doing local trading; it wasn't really import business. We started import of cement in 2000.

Okay, so you had a cement trading business. Somebody thought Lafarge maybe buying it, you decided not to sell because they wanted control, and yet you then decided to build your own cement manufacturing business, is that right?

Yes, I decided in 2003 to build my own cement factory. At that time, Nigeria was only producing about 1.8, 1.9 million tons, but we went ahead and started with 5 million tons of cement capacity.

So what year was that?  

This was 2000... and we started building end of 2003, and we finished in 2007.  

So now you're the largest cement manufacturer in Nigeria?  

Well, the largest cement manufacturer in Sub-Saharan Africa.  

So you're building a refinery in Nigeria. Why does Nigeria need another refinery?  

Well, you know, David, let me give you a little bit of history, you know. What we do as Dangote Group, we use businesses like... now, using our current businesses to build the future of the business. Like when we were in sugar, it was the sugar profits that we used in building the cement. Now with the cement, we're building so many things, you know: refinery, fertilizer, you know, petroleum products, and then we're doing also petrochemicals with the refinery. Your question is, okay, why are we building a refinery? When you look at the entire Sub-Saharan Africa, you know, we have only two working refineries: one is in Côte d'Ivoire, which has only 75,000 capacity; the other one is by Sasol in South Africa. But majority of all these countries, almost all the Sub-Saharan African countries, they don't have refining capacity. So all of them, they export the oil, but they import product. So we realized that majority of the foreign exchange spendings of Nigeria was to petroleum products inputs.  

So Nigeria is exporting its oil and then it has to buy refined oil products back, import it, right?

Yes.

And what you're doing is you're building one of the largest refineries in the world?  

It is the largest single-line in the world. It's 650,000 capacity, 650,000 barrels a day of refining capacity.  

So to do that, do you have to borrow some money, or where did the money come from to build that?  

Well, what we are doing right now, we are borrowing from the commercial banks, we're also borrowing some money from, you know, financial... some financial institutions like the African Development Bank, the development banks, financial development, you know, banks. We're borrowing from African Exim Bank.  

So many companies outside the United States would like to invest in Africa. Where do you recommend that they invest? In Nigeria, South Africa, Kenya? Obviously, you're probably partial to Nigeria, but are there good investment opportunities for non-Africans in Africa?  

Well, there are good opportunities for everybody, you know, and I think that's protection also for everybody. You know, as we speak today, you know, even for university, let me give you an example. In Nigeria, if I have a partnership with you that I'm investing, I don't even... I won't have what you call minimum taxation. But if the company is owned by myself alone as a Nigerian, an indigenous entity, we have a minimum taxation. So there's quite a lot in terms of inviting foreigners to come and invest in Africa. But countries that I can suggest for you to invest: one of them, of course, you know, Nigeria; Ghana is a very good place to invest; Côte d'Ivoire, you know; Kenya, Kenya is also a very good place to invest.  

Now, I first met you a number of years ago when I was raising my firm's African investment fund, and you invested in it. And today, the bloom seems to be off the rose in African private equity investing. It was very attractive to many people 4, 5, 6 years ago; today, it seems to be less attractive. Is that because the economies in Africa have gone down a bit, or what would you say is the reason?

Well, I think most of that reason has to do with, first of all, lack of understanding of what you invest. You know, I mean, look at the investment that we made. Would you... I think I can say that 90 percent of what we invested in were doing very well. So I think it is where you should invest. You... myself as an African, I cannot invest in every single sector, so I have to be very choosy where I invest. And, you know, there's a lot of, you know, wrong perception, you know. People read stories from newspapers and they believe what they are reading. But I think, you know, as we go along, you know, quite a lot of changes in most African countries try and change in terms of, you know, focus on the economy.

Now, you live principally in Lagos, is that right?

Yes.

And how many people are there in Lagos?  

In Lagos today, we have about 25 million—25 million people in terms of population. I know it's very...  

So getting around in Lagos, which I've tried to do, is not that easy. Well, getting around New York's not that easy either. But for example, when you get around, do you have like special police cars that take you around? How do you get around Lagos?  

Well, I get around in Lagos, yeah, sometimes I have, you know, police escort, but not all the time. Normally, weekend I drive myself.

You drive yourself?

Yes, I do.

Do people stare at you and say, "There's the wealthiest man in Africa driving himself"?  

They do, sometimes, when they recognize, you know, the person driving, yes.  

Do you go to a restaurant by yourself? Do people come up for selfies, or do they ask you for money?  

They don't really ask me for money, but even here, anytime when I go to places, you know, to either eat or to, you know, I get a lot of requests for selfies. Well, yes, you know, it's normal.  

Now, you have some outside interests. One of them, I think, you're interested in what we call in the United States soccer, but other people call football: so the Arsenal team. And is that a team that you would like to buy someday?

It is a team that, yes, you know, I would like to buy, you know, someday. What I keep saying today, we have twenty billion dollars' worth of projects, and I think that's really what I want to concentrate on, you know. I'm trying to finish building the company, and then after we finish, maybe sometime 2021, you know, we can...

You're not buying the team right now?

I'm not buying Arsenal right now. I'm buying Arsenal when I finish all this, all right, because I'm trying to take the company to the next level.

What are the attributes that you think you have brought to the table which make you successful?

I think the most important one, number one: if you are going into any business, you must understand the business A to Z. You must know that business.

Okay. So in terms of Africa itself generally, are you bullish on Africa's prospects as a place in which people can invest—private equity firms or industrial companies to invest?

I think I'm very, very bullish when it comes to Africa, and it is the main reason, David, today why we have twenty billion dollars that we invest in, you know, our group, which we'll finish by end of next year, first quarter of, you know, I mean in the next two years. That's in the next two years. I'm very, very bullish, you know, in Africa. We have done very, very well in, you know, Africa, and, you know, I can tell you, if we continue with what we are doing today, based on our own projections, we'll be able to be, you know, within the next five years, in the Fortune 500.

Now, from time to time on some television networks, I see advertisements for Dangote, yes sir, for your companies. Was that general brand building? Why do you advertise that, say, in the United States, the Dangote brand, because most of your businesses are not in the United States?

Well, you know, it's a brand building, and like what we have planned to do, we are not going to remain dominant only in Africa. You know, I also invest... why wouldn't I invest outside Africa? Because what we are doing right now, you know, we were investing, yes, mainly in Sub-Saharan Africa. But if you look at what we are building today, we have a company that has revenues of four billion dollars. In the next two years, we'll have a company that will have a revenue of thirty billion dollars. So with that, we'll have quite a lot of money. What we are trying to do is to use major part of that money and invest outside Africa, and maybe 40 percent of it to continue to invest in Africa, because we are invested very, very heavily now.  

So you're in your early 60s, you're 62 now?  

Well, that's pretty early 60s! So do you intend to keep doing this for 10 more years, 20 more years, 30 more years?  

Ah, let me not commit, but I think I will... I will maybe work for the next at least, you know, very active in the next 15.  

Let's suppose somebody's watching this and says, "I want to be like Mr. Dangote. I want to be a successful businessman in Africa." What are the attributes, or anywhere, what are the attributes that you think you have brought to the table which make you so successful? Is it intelligence, hard work, persistence, all of those things? What would you say are the most important attributes?  

I think the most important one, number one: if you are going into any business, you must understand the business A to Z. You must know that business. You shouldn't just want to invest because somebody now says, "Okay, you know, there's good money in cement," then you want to jump into cement. You have to understand the business in and out, and that's the difference with me: I know my business. You know, now you can wake me up anytime and ask me about fertilizer, ask me anything that we are doing. And the other one is really to work very hard, and you have to have the tenacity of continuing. You'll have some hiccups here and there, but you have to be... you have to be focused in terms of what you do.

You know, I've known you for a while, and I never seem to get you to yell or scream or... You seem very low-key, you know, use this technique of yelling and screaming at people, or just very low-key and even-keeled. So to what do you attribute that, or am I wrong?

I think, no, yeah, no, you're not wrong. That's my nature. I'm always... I'm very quiet and I'm very, very calm. I get upset sometimes when people try to be, you know, either to outsmart me, or I don't like people who will not tell me the truth. I always like people to look at me, too, you know, and tell me the truth.

So will you invest any in the United States?

We are going to start investing, you know, in the United States. Just after this project, we want to open a family office both in New York and in London. We already have an office in London which has been operating for the last 30 years, so we want to turn part of that, you know, as an office so that we can diversify the wealth, as you know, you know, I've discussed this one with you before, where, you know, sometimes in Africa you have issues of devaluation, you know, you know. So we want to really preserve some of the family's wealth.

Right now, sometimes wealthy people, they collect art, they collect cars, they collect other things. What, some of your wealth that you're not using for philanthropy, what do you do with it? Do you collect art, are you a collector of things, or...?  

I'm not really a collector of art, you know. Any time when I have excess money, I like to put more in terms of charity. I don't really have a very expensive lifestyle.  

And the great pleasure of your life is just building your company and then giving away extra money, that's your greatest pleasure in life, okay?  

Yes.

Well, it's a very good success story, and I know a lot of people wanted to hear how you've done it, and I guess you're saying it's hard work and persistence, a little luck maybe from time to time?

Definitely, luck must be there. You know, if there's no luck, you can't be able to make it, of course.

Well, thank you very much for coming today, and I appreciate your giving us your insights. Thank you.

Thank you so much, David.