The legacy that I would like to leave behind is one who went back into a heritage, into our history, and made us to be recognized once again that we are indeed people who add value.

The fashion industry in Nigeria has come a long way since pre-colonial times. Fashion design has changed from being a trade for the uneducated young person who needed a skill to get by, to today where even the most accomplished academics are involved, all vying for the opportunity to showcase their talent on some of the world's most exclusive fashion destinations.

Our next guest is one who has managed to break the consistent boundaries that the fashion industry holds up, both locally and internationally: Mrs. Deola Sagoe. Deola Sagoe has entrepreneurship in her blood, coming from a prominent family in Nigeria—entrepreneurs and owners of the Odua Group. She studied Business Administration at the University of Miami and returned to Nigeria to get a Master's degree in Finance Management from the University of Lagos.

Deola's mother had been running a small tailoring house called Odua Creations and was known for producing meticulously embroidered traditional Nigerian menswear. In 1989, Deola joined her mother with a view of expanding the label's repertoire to encompass more contemporary designs for the ever-developing, cosmopolitan Nigerian society. The following year, Deola began designing under her own name.

My brand is called Deola, or rather the House of Deola. The House of Deola carries two labels at the moment that are very well-known: that is the Deola label, that used to be known as the Deola Sagoe label, which is the high-end luxury, the bespoke line; and we've got Clan.

Basically, what I've done or what I keep doing and will keep doing long into the future is to reach back into our heritage in terms of our fabrics and in terms of our crafts and our skills, and contemporize them, make them relevant in today's world, and in that way continue to sustain them well into the future.

It can be said that in pre-colonial times, the traditional Nigerian fashion industry was already well-developed. There were designers and producers who made royal clothing, who were members of the King's court. The trade was exclusively for the King's important members and himself—the haute couture category. Deola is a haute couture fashion designer from Ondo State, Nigeria. She is a fashion visionary with a unique approach to her craft that has endeared her to followers and critics all over the world. For the past 25 years, Deola has left a global footprint across the various continents.

I have seen myself foremost as a businesswoman who happens to be very creative—or should I say the other way around? I have seen myself as a creative who can actually not only survive, but actually make something huge out of what I do. So yes, I know that the constraints are there as a woman in terms of you're not taken seriously, and they're still looking for the man who's behind you, you know, stuff like that. But I do not concentrate on such things. I have no time; I cannot afford the luxury to keep thinking first, "Oh, I'm a woman," then... If I do that, I might as well say, "Oh, I'm a woman, I'm Black, I'm Nigerian," and then what happens? It paralyzes me! But I choose to look at the positive sides of things: that African women are very, very strong women.

Well, the vision for the House of Deola is to be the African brand of choice when it comes to luxury, when it comes to premium ready-to-wear, when it comes to any products that can be or needs be traced back to Africa.

Well, the Nigerian fashion industry has grown in leaps and bounds. The awareness is there; it's all over Nigeria. And it's obvious—just go on social media, go on Instagram, and you'll see that a lot more people are getting into fashion in many different ways.

There are those people who consume fashion, and I think that for every African—it's not just Nigerians, Africans—fashion is intrinsically woven into our culture. So we love to be fashionable, we love to look good, and we love to wear the best. Even the Maasai tribesmen, even though most of what they wear is beads and the rest of their bodies are mostly left uncovered, but you can see that sense of fashion—they love fashion.

So coming back to Nigeria and to this day, as I said, you have the consumers of fashion, you have the suppliers of fashion—those are the tailors, the fashion designers, the people who sell fashion as well, you know, the retailers. So we have all that. But unfortunately, we do not have structure yet.

The challenges range from not having a structure through to a serious issue with infrastructure. You know, and of course, embedded in the problem with structure that we have is the fact that distribution is a big problem. However, when you talk in terms of we are aware of what is going on about fashion, we're very much aware, even sometimes more than our counterparts in Europe and in the Americas.

Using hand-woven materials which she brings to life in a range of distinct cultures, contemporizing almost lost traditional African techniques, Deola's designs present a unique vision and attitude for the well-rounded modern woman.

Deola uniquely showcases contemporary fashion utilizing authentic African fabrics of antiquity, bringing together contemporary and traditional in a unique and fresh way. Deola is well known for uncanny attention to detail, her expert handling of a diverse range of fabrics, as well as her exemplary understanding of the African woman's body. Amongst her many innovations is Komole, her own authentic answer to every African's yearning: the original interpretation and crafting of lace.

The creation of Komole... for the first time in Africa, we've been able to come up with a fabric that is our beloved lace, but is made from our own African authentic fabric, which in many parts of Africa, like Nigeria, Ghana, Ethiopia, even Madagascar, there is a lot of weaving that goes on on ancient looms. So it's a great breakthrough for us to be the first to actually make this fabric out of our own hand-woven fabric.

Young fashion designers need to know exactly what they want. Do they want the drama behind just being recognized as a fashion designer, as a celebrity, or are they looking out to actually make a business of it? Of course, if they want it to be sustainable well into the future, they would say, "Well, I love to design, but I can't starve. I've got a nation or nations to prove, and even if I am going to clothe them beautifully and creatively, I still need to make money." Because at the end of the day, the bottom line is that you're able to not just survive, but to actually make it work, make profits from it. At the end of the day, it's a business, it's not a show.

Deola Sagoe has gained international notoriety for her lively and colorful designs. Her fashion design credentials took a huge leap forward when she won the M-Net AngloGold African Design Award. She's been nominated by the legendary US Vogue editor André Leon Talley as one of the four designers from Africa to show their work at the New York Fashion Week in 2000. She later on went to be the first Nigerian who had her own stand-alone show at the New York Fashion Week in September 2014. Deola became the first Black woman to present a collection at Alta Roma, Rome's celebrated Fashion Week back in 2004. Her globally appealing style has earned her an enviable clientele that ranges from Africa's First Ladies to society ladies like Lydia Hearst, top model Alek Wek, and famous personalities such as Oprah Winfrey and Will Smith.

My life revolves mostly around the brand. I find that most days, it's always from home to work, and then back home. And I think that it's chiefly because I enjoy what I do so much that it is not a chore; it's not something that I wake up to each morning not wanting to do. It's become a part of me, but I do realize that I have to have time for leisure.

Well, as a designer, it's all about, "My goodness, she's outdone herself this time! What is she going to do next time?" Most of the time with every collection—and I would say especially with the Komole collection—it's been, "You've outdone yourself! I don't know what else you're going to do for the next 20 years, you don't have to design a thing!" But it's good pressure for me, and I like it because it keeps driving me to do more, to keep on being the best that I can be. And in that way, I get even much more innovative. There's still so much that is in the pipeline that has not come into manifestation yet.

She was appointed to represent Nigeria in an international campaign organized by the United Nations World Food Programme. The campaign, titled "Catwalk the World: Fashion for Food," began in Nigeria in April 2006 and recently staged an event in Ghana which brought celebrities like Damon Dash, his wife designer Rachel Roy, and Ghanaian-born, London-based designer Ozwald Boateng. The campaign's goal is to raise money towards halving the number of hungry people in the world, particularly children, by 2015.  

Sagoe frequently exhibits her couture collection at Cape Town Fashion Week, and she continues to lead the way in carving a space for Nigeria on the global fashion map.  

Deola's story is that of an iconic woman who has over the years put Nigeria's fashion industry on the world's global map—a feat she achieved against all odds.

Success to me means being able to impact upon the lives of other people in such a way that it's a win-win.