Good afternoon. Can everyone hear me? Is everyone tired here or are they okay? Quick exercise: Can everyone just stand up, please? Everyone stand up, stand up, stand up, stand up!

Thank you, I just wanted to see if you guys would do it. You can sit back down.

So when Ado reached out earlier this year to come and speak at TEDxEuston to inspire—real weighty subjects which aren't normally in my frame of thinking—I thought about what could I really say that could actually make any kind of difference. There's been a lot written about how far we've come as a company in a relatively short period of time, but I actually want to go back before that. I actually want to speak about failure, and I've basically lived a life of failure. If you can walk with me from when I was born to sort of when I started at iROKO and what's happened from there.

My birthday is in a couple of weeks, December the 11th. A few weeks after I was born, my dad left my mom, so I've never met my dad before. If anyone knows African parents, they know that the men have egos, ambitions, overbearing in terms of what they want their children to do. I had no concept of that. In the early '90s, they used to ship kids back who were "bad" for re-education and programming. Yeah, that was me!

As I was leaving to come to TEDx yesterday, my mom reminded me that when I was seven, she said that she wanted to get a color TV and a VHS. In my naivety, I said, "You know what, Mom, keep on dreaming!" because at that time we were just poor. She saved up for two years for a deposit—just a deposit—so she could get a VHS and a TV. This was like 1987, so this stuff was expensive.

I spent three or four years out in Nigeria. There's the adage, I think it goes, "Spare the rod, spoil the child." Yeah, it's alive and kicking in the eastern part of Nigeria! So they literally trained me to be humble. They trained me to work hard, but unfortunately, when I came back, I actually was three or four years behind my peers.

Fast forward to 2002: I was 21, I started at the University of Manchester, the first person in my family ever to this day to ever go to university. Up until I graduated, my mom didn't really know what I did. I studied chemistry; she was like, "Oh, biochemistry, medicine?" I said, "No, Mom, it's not medicine, just the chemistry part."

For three years I was at university. I graduated in 2005. As you can imagine, as a Nigerian parent, she said, "That's it, I'm retiring just about now!" You know what comes next: mortgage, grandkids... You know Nigerian parents, you know the drill.

But I wanted to do something else. At that point in time, I built up what I believed was a core competence that someone had rubber-stamped. I wasn't restricted to being just some poor kid from Southeast London. If you know Southeast London, that's basically where I was born. So I was not restricted to that; someone had given me a certificate to say, "Do you know what, Jason? Go out into the world and do great things," as they do at university.

I then spent the next five and a half, six years reversing that, making my mom cry pretty much every single year. What I did was that I focused on entrepreneurship, or whatever I believed that to be. And I was a spectacular failure, a certified failure!

From 2005 to 2010, I was just a complete failure. And when people talk about failure, what is failure? It's personal. People fear failure, but what they really fear is the shame: the shame from their peers, the expectations of their parents, the expectations of what their peers are doing at any particular time—be it promotion, be it mortgages, be it getting married, be it whatever it is. There's some sort of expectation that you're not meeting up with your peers.

Let me tell you some of my stories of failure. There may be some people here from Manchester... I was technically homeless for like 10 months in 2007. I ran a student magazine. As part of the magazine, it was kind of cool to be like the guy who's a bit homeless, couch to couch. It was humiliating, but it was cool. Students have that capacity to sort of rationalize everything.

For three years, I couldn't even get a bank account! Up to 2010, I actually couldn't get a bank account. There was a wave of consumer electronics, consumption, fashion, all sorts of beautiful things that largely passed me by. I actually couldn't even get a contract SIM—till today, I still use pay-as-you-go, because no one will give me one! True story.

I worked 18 hours a day for nothing. And because I was scared that people would label me a failure, I tried to hide that failure to the point where you basically couldn't anymore.

In 2010, I was just broke. When I mean broke, I literally... I left London in 2002, went to university, yada yada yada. In 2010, I moved back in with my mom. As a Nigerian parent, you can imagine what her expectations were at that point: crying, extra tithe, Thanksgiving prayer, "something must be responsible for this!"

In my darkest times, in amongst everything which had happened to me over that 5-year period, pretty much every single one of my peers had outpaced me in every metric. I was broke, I was living with my mom, I was still on the game. But I still woke up, I still could laugh, I still could smile. You know, I could still get annoyed at most things; I might not have any money, but it's the same thing, right?

So what I found was that in amongst that failure, I somehow just embraced it. Human beings have an amazing capacity to normalize things. So if you live or wallow in failure, it becomes normal. For me, it became normal. And in it becoming normal, it enabled me to just live with it. So I'm broke, no stable girlfriend for the last eight years—because who dates the poor guy? True story, man, just telling you how it is!

What that enabled me to do was be completely unshackled from risk. Like, I have nothing to lose, so whatever!

At that point in time, I came across iROKO. iROKO was my 11th company—my 11th company! And I was like, "Oh my God, this is the one! Mom, this is the big time!"

I had no money. I've actually never put a single penny of my own money into iROKO, because I never had any! My best friend of 10 years, Mr. Bastian Gotter, who sits there in the crowd... I somehow convinced him. This guy is a believer, a certified believer. I asked my Nigerian friends, "Hey, you know, I'm doing this thing in Nollywood, Nigerian movies, kick in some money," and they were like, "Uh, no."

Over the course of 2010, Bastian basically liquidated his life savings. It wasn't spare cash lying around; he had been working for five or six years at the time. He sold everything, and we're talking up to $150,000 for someone who's basically younger than me. And his belief was that I had failed enough!

So on the 1st of December 2010, I was broke. I had recently moved back to Nigeria, courtesy of the Bank of Bastian, and every single person thought I was mad. Now, Bastian's German. Everyone was like, "Wait, wait, wait, Nigeria? The internet? He's moving to Lagos?" Well, you got the email, right, so you guys know how it is!

It was absolute madness. But again, I had failed enough. There's a point where if you just keep on failing, nothing matters anymore. It literally just doesn't matter anymore.

Why I talk about failure is that every single day, even today as I've been walking around, people ask me, "How did you do it? What made you do it?" The interesting thing is that I've been all around the world, and young Black guys and girls ask me, "Man, I want to do that too!"

And my answer is really simple: "Why? Why don't you? Why don't you?" And these guys are smarter than I am. I submit that most people in this room are smarter than me. What I realized is that the world is full of people who are really, really smart, but they are holding themselves back.

So I came up with this theory of emotional capital. It's like a bank balance: it starts from zero. You do something, you fail, you get back up again—that's a little deposit. You do something again, you fail, you get back up again—that's a little more deposit. There's a point where you earn the respect of your peers just by working hard, just by staying at it. There is a point where people just think this guy is going to be spectacularly successful, or mad! The jury is still out on me.

With this emotional capital, you're unshackled from what people expect you to do. Now, what we've done in the UK... because I can only talk from my own experiences. In the UK, they've done an amazing job of creating a professional middle class: lawyers, bankers, doctors, accountants, consultants. Beautiful, amazing! But the problem is our culture, our parents especially, they actually discourage us from finding what we really and truly want to do.

Using terms from the internet, there has been trillions of dollars of value created everywhere: in the US, in South America, in Asia, in India, in Europe, in the UK. Nothing in Africa! When we look at Facebook, we use Twitter, Foursquare, Google, Yahoo, eBay... where do we even start? All of these companies were started by young people. And where do these young people come from? Stanford, Harvard, Princeton, Yale... the list goes on. The elite of the world, wherever they are, are creating amazing companies, except for Africa.

Now, my big bet was: I jump on a plane, I could figure stuff out, and the opportunities there will just figure themselves out as well.

Fast forward to today: today is iROKOtv's first birthday! And the key takeaway for me is that there are hundreds, if not thousands, of leaders of tomorrow. I talk in internet terms because that's what I know, but there are leaders in politics, there are leaders in social enterprise, there are leaders in all sorts of things. But the problem is that they are scared to take that step forward. They're scared of failure.

You know Nigerians, we know packaging! So we'll package ourselves. Even if there's nothing in your bag, you're sort of bouncing out there. You go to the club, they're using their credit cards to buy bottles of champagne, because that's just how we do it up there, right?

No matter how much you package it, no matter how much you hide it: failure is failure is failure. The more we embrace it, the more we're honest with ourselves, the more easily we can move on. Because it breaks my heart that there's a revolution waiting to happen in Africa. If someone like me can achieve what I've done in such a short period of time, think of what would happen if you actual smart people with a bit of educational training and professional experience go and do something!

Every single job I've had, I've been fired from! So I'm just a bad person, right?

I think the more we have open discussions about failure, the more we embrace them, the more as a culture we accept them, the more people actually can spend time jumping on planes. Because there's always an excuse: "Oh, next year," "Oh, I haven't got enough money." There's always an excuse. And I think we've gone beyond the excuse point.

When it comes to things like media, technology—things which require some sort of specialist knowledge, although I had none, so again, complete luck—anything which actually requires us to basically just have balls, yeah, basically! That is where we're actually going to see the big change.

Nigeria has a massive unemployment problem. They are churning graduates out left, right, and center with no jobs. Government's not going to fix this. There's been a lot of talk about social entrepreneurship, I think that's fine. We have like 80 people in Lagos; we pay them well, we're bringing internet jobs. I've never made any money in Nigeria; I make money from the rest of the world and bring it to Nigeria.

In as much as I live on planes, I find the rest of the world just sterile. In as much as Nigeria and Africa seem quite scary, it's not! Because what's the worst that's going to happen? You fail, but there's tomorrow!

When I started reading, I never saw anyone who looked like me. I'd go onto Amazon, I'd buy all sorts of books, I'd read them, consume them. Everyone had a story: almost bankrupt business, about to be taken over by somebody... there was always some sort of challenge to overcome. And I think the key thing is that if we can open up the debate within ourselves that failure is just okay... it's just okay!

Today is December 1st, 2012. Who knows iROKOtv? Anyone? Thank you, thank you!

In the space of two years, we now have offices in three countries—we just opened up two in Africa this month. We have over 100 employees. Again, I'm surprised at this! If someone would have asked me 10 years ago, "Would you be up here speaking to you guys?" No way! Why?

So, I am a certified failure. You are smarter than me. Go out there and be brilliant!

Thank you!