Welcome back to The Morning Show here on Arise News. There is a strong belief that in exploring and nurturing existing cultures, one opens up an exciting territory for creating and inspiring future cultures. Joining us today is fashion designer Kenneth Ize, who believes strongly in this idea.

Welcome to The Morning Show, Kenneth.

Straight off the runway of Arise Fashion Week 2018. Now, can we just say your collection was absolutely amazing! It really did stand out, and your vibe is really about heritage and Nigeria and Africa. Why did you decide to take this approach?

I believe that there are so many things that have been done, and in my own country and my own continent being developed now, I think it's just something to focus on. Reinterpreting cultures and identity matters a lot, because this is who we are and this is what I understand.

What do you see when foreign designers use African fabric? Do you feel it's flattery, should we be excited, or do you think it's cultural appropriation?

Honestly speaking, I think I only think more about my work. So I try not to... because it's work, so I know where I'm going to. So I try to then do it the way I would want to do it.

They like to use our fabric and prints and things like that, and then mark up the price. And then when a Nigerian decides to put a price, the equivalent becomes a problem. Do you think that's due to the "abroad syndrome"?

No, because I feel like fashion itself is not... Fashion is a business, right? So there's a way people should go about it. Education is very important. As a fashion designer, I feel like that will actually make you understand the work ethic on how to grow a brand, I would say.

In terms of like... there's a pattern cutter, there's a tailor, there's a showroom also. So before... during the process of making a collection, there is so much that is needed to be done. So it's not just like, "Oh yeah, I'm going to my tailor and making this, and that's just it." So there's a process, actually.

What's the process like to make a scarf like this?

Okay, so I'm going to tell you my overall process before I actually ended up at this state. This is like starting... So I researched a lot. I research a lot, I travel a lot, I start getting involved. I look at people. I'm very curious about things, so I'll just walk up to someone and ask them questions: "Okay, so how do you get this?"

So that was my research for about three years, and I failed a lot of times. But there was a time where I had to then revisit my research from day one, and then go back to it. So it's a journey; it didn't just start now.

Now, the fashion industry, like everyone knows, is a multi-billion dollar industry, but it's almost like Nigerians haven't really keyed into it. They haven't really harnessed the full potential of the industry. What would you say is missing, or do you see areas designers can do better?

High-quality check production could be done better here. Understanding that everyone is not a designer—we have to understand that also. It's about understanding the process of design, that's very important, like I said before. And knowing where something is coming from, not just making something, you know? You have to be realistic in anything you do.

So I believe that designers that are good then intend to work this way, because they think about the future and they think about the present time now. So it's not just like, "Oh yeah, I'm only designing for this Nigerian market." I don't want to design for just one market—I want my clothes to be seen around the world. I want it to be worn by a lot of people.

And it's not just about me being selfish, but it's also about promoting my own culture and my own country. When I started making these scarves, it was so sad because a lady in Paris told me, "Oh yeah, you're from Nigeria? Wow, like Boko Haram, for example."

Then I said, "You know what? This is exactly why I'm coming to your country, to Paris, to show you my work—something that could make you happy. So I'm making this fabric, I'm telling a different story entirely, completely different about what people know about Nigeria."

And she was quite amazed. I said, "Yeah, this is why I want to show you the things we could do." And it's a developing country. I feel like we need so many things as well, definitely in terms of production skills, people skills.

The weavers making this fabric, they have no formal education. They have no idea... After she's done with this fabric, I don't think she's going to pass it on to the next person, because there's nobody to hold it back, to own this treasure. So it's not anymore. And I feel like... she has a job to offer people, only if people knew there was a job there. So I feel like a lot of people don't know there are actually jobs that this could provide.

It's so unique, and that's the beauty. What you were saying about the Parisian lady that was talking about Boko Haram, when you're now changing the conversation to your print and what you're doing with the fabric in your collection, your designs obviously tell another story about Nigeria. So whenever she wants to have a conversation again about Nigeria, she's more likely to discuss Kenneth Ize.

Now, that brings us to the Arise Fashion Week that recently concluded. How important are fashion shows like that to the fashion industry here in Nigeria?

Arise is very professional. I would say it's so far my best show I've had in my career. It's very exciting to just work with so many experts in the industry to actually understand, you know... Making a collection took me about four to five months. I've cried in those nights, you know. I've gone through a lot during this process, being down on the street trying to get my work done, but nobody knows about this thing. So it's just that five to ten minutes that you have the time and the chance to show your work, and working with people that understand it makes so much more sense.

Will we be expecting to see more showcases, or was this a one-off for this Arise Fashion Week collection?

I don't know. To me, design is about feeling, and it's just like what I'm feeling right now, I just would love to share it more. I want people to look sexy, you know. I want people to look very rich. I'm into a Black man looking super, super rich—I'm into that a lot! Because this thing you're wearing, it's really not super expensive, but at the same time, the idea and where it's coming from makes it a luxury.

I would love to see a lot of people just wearing my clothes, and it's money, you know? It's fresh, it's swag.

Will there be stores across the country?

Right now, we stock in Vienna, in a store called Park Vienna, and we stock in Switzerland in a shop called Cabinet Zurich. Yeah, just those stores for now.

Do you see yourself training upcoming designers, skills you may want to pass on? Do you see that as something you will take on?

Definitely, definitely. Two years ago, I used to have an assistant that graduated from UNILAG, and at that point, finished UNILAG with nothing else to do. That really touched me a lot, because at the end of the day, I have had chances because I've gone to school abroad. Probably this person doesn't know the next step to take.

Then I told her, "Okay, this is Nigeria right now, why don't you be a tour guide, for example?" Because I have lots of friends I would like to visit, but Nigeria is not like a tourist place; they don't intend to actually come unless they have someone on board that could take them around.

So, long story short, I'm always into helping younger people. It's not just even with my qualification; my job is about my ideas that I can give.

How do you rock these scarves? And tell me your social media platforms where people can reach you.

Yeah, it's @kennethize on Instagram. It's K-E-N-N-E-T-H I-Z-E.

That's amazing. Thank you so much for joining us!

Thank you so much! Thank you.

Well, that brings us to the end of The Morning Show today. Thank you so much for watching. Enjoy the rest of your day. Goodbye!