Here is the complete, full transcript with all timestamps removed:

---

First of all, I started my business from angel investing. It was a small step-in that I started the business with. I was very particular about long-term. Long-term was the word that I use consistently. Tara Fela Durotoye is a pioneering beauty entrepreneur. As founder of House of Tara, she built the country's first indigenous makeup brand while empowering thousands of women through entrepreneurship, leadership, and enterprise. Ordinarily, I would have thought the dream would have been to sell the biggest beauty company in France approached. What? Yeah. But I wasn't sure that I wanted the company to be owned by a French company. Why? That would have been a good exit. Yes. I was 30 36 37. Oh wow. Yeah. Did I want to exit my business? No. Because then after our products were counterfeited and now I had to fight counterfeits myself and that was another moment I think I suffered a kind of trauma that I don't think I've fully recovered from. Do you think you've won the fight? H good question.

Do you get tired? Of course, I do get tired and I have gotten tired a few times and I have suffered burnout as a result of it. Um, yes. Um, and I talk about it in my book. And I think that I I think it's one of the things that is not spoken spoken about often. And I tell a story of how um it was 20 I think the end of 2015 my I have three sons and the children we had agreed with the children that if they did well um they will travel for Christmas. Um but that if anyone doesn't do well they are not traveling. So we admit that and I think one of the things we'll try to do is to keep to our words with our children because especially at that early stages the kids have to just know when you have said ABC. So when we looked at the results um two didn't do well one did well. So my husband said I should take one and he'll stay back with the second two and sit with them through that holiday to look at their books to make sure that he fixes whatever the issue is that didn't make them do well. M so I had to take one child with me. But before that, this was Christmas. And around that week, I shut down from work. You know how the you have the week of Christmas. I was so tired, I couldn't get out of bed, but I wasn't ill, but I was just tired. I wasn't sick. I didn't have a fever, but I just found I was tired to get out of bed. And um my husband said, "Oh, you know, you're probably exhausted. You've had a very busy and intense year, so maybe this holiday is for you to rest." And now I was now going to travel just after Christmas with this with my son. When we got to the airport in Lagos, I almost felt like fainting like I almost felt I was so tired that it was almost I was going to pass out. Eventually took got some energy got all the way. We were traveling to Mauritius. We arrived in Mauritius. I knew that I was not ill but I knew that I was physically fatigued.

The good thing was there was another Nigerian mom who was in the room. who was who traveled with her own son. Uh we all go to the same church, her children are the same age. So she kind of took my son go for breakfast with him and her son and the hotel was the resort was in such a way that I could see where they were. I could hear their voice. I could see them because of the way it was designed. So I was comfortable and I stayed in my room. Do you believe that that entire holiday I stayed in my room? But you know what panicked me on the 31st? You know, we all have this ritual where on the 31st you start reflecting of what happened in the course of the year. I couldn't remember anything that happened in the year. I blanked out. So I panicked that I couldn't remember. Then I panicked that I was panicking and I was by myself. Wow. And the more I was panicking, the more I was panicking, the more I couldn't remember. So I got this idea, take my passport and open it and maybe I would look through it and begin to remember places that I went to that would maybe rejig my memory because I just wanted to be grateful for what had happened but I couldn't remember what to be grateful for. That's how tired I I was.

So I took my passport and start flipping through. Do you know that that year was the year that CNN African Voices featured me? But they came CNN came to Nigeria, called me from Atlanta, came to Nigeria and they were with me for one one week recording and documenting my entire week from my work to my office to my church to my um speaking engagement all this together. And I didn't remember not only had they um this picture had been um um CNN had show showed it and they it was shown extensively for maybe a whole month because there was a crisis in Paris in France and so they couldn't really change their content their content. So it meant that my content showed for four whole weeks whereas it was only supposed to show for one week. That's how amazing it was. And I was getting calls from all over the world but I didn't remember. It was also the year that Stanford University wrote a case study about House of Tara. So they had sent a professor here to N in Nigeria. He had been here about three or four times in the course of the year. Sat with my team, documented information and they had created a the case study. Not only created a case study, it was now published on the Harvard website. So the case study was now being used at Harvard. My father, my uncle-in-law just called me one day to say somebody was at Harvard and this case was being featured and her na his name and my name are similar. So they called him to ask him do you know this person and said that's my my my nephew's uh wife. I didn't remember how do you forget that Stanford University wrote a case study about you like how does that happen? And there were so many other amazing things that happened because this is the power of burnout. Wow. where I was fiscally fatigued and and I think it's now one of the things that I'm most careful about because I want to I'm entering into my next phase.

So I've done what you call my first phase and this is I'm going to be 50 next year. I want to build differently um not build in a way that I allow myself to be so exhausted in that manner. So the question you asked how did how did you come out of that situation? So um the board uh the chairman of my board who started business around the same my age I think had insight around what was wrong and and this is the power of having um mentors right and she said to me um you have two senior executives who you've brought in one from u diagio the other from um PWC these two people have the ab ability to run the business uh and I think it's time for you to allow those who you have recruited to actually do their job. Why don't you take a sabbatical? This is the time to take a sbatical. So I was asked to take a year off. So the board gave me permission to take a year off. Um I first started by taking off emails on my phone um so that I wasn't emailing people round the clock so so that I could I could put some kind of order in my life. And number two, I I stopped going into the office um and asked um the expos to be held at my home. And I think by asking the expos to be held at my home, I couldn't ask people to come to come to my home every day. So it forced me again to have to have a structure around once a month uh where they come and they present um how the business is doing. One person was in charge of the commercial side of the business, the other was in charge of the operations and finance and what have you. And um I took that one year off. I spent time rediscovering the things that I like that I didn't know that I like. I paid attention to to the word leisure.

Okay. I think that I didn't know the things that I enjoy doing outside of work because I like my work. I turned my work into my hobby, my business, my girlfriend, my child and it became everything. So, but have you heard have you heard the term called you just used the word called leisure? Have you heard the term earn your leisure? Earn your leisure. Yeah, it's actually a platform actually kind of like a podcast platform and uh that term I mean I'm not even speaking for the podcast but that term always got me. Do you think It was at a point you had earned your leisure because would you have necessarily made because now people are building right do you think you would have been able to cuz I don't think every business person that can just take a one year salatical right right yes you earned be able to do that so so I worry about and this is about designing how we design okay I if if I if you asked me to go back what would I do differently while I was building I will institute leisure as lifestyle as part of my lifestyle which is the reason why I didn't know what I enjoyed cuz I wasn't doing anything else other than my work. Do you think you would have still been able to achieve of course if you had balanced it? Yes. I feel I would have been more efficient uh because all the times I was having breakdown those breakdowns would have been minimized. I would have been optimized because I would have had more runway. Um I know that people think that um you earn your leisure after you have worked worked worked well. Unfortunately, many times you can work work and burn your your have chronic stress and at the end of your age your age as you're getting older you start falling ill because of those things. So what I would advise my if I was going to advise someone and I went back is I would design my business life in a way that number one I knew what the things that I enjoyed. So I took time to start asking myself what what are the things that I can do. I remember there's a very famous um poem called leisure actually. Oh really? Yes. And it's um and it's starts with uh what is life if full of cares? We have no time to stand and stare. What is life if full of cares? We have no time to stand and stare. And if you read the entire uh poem, I wish we could read it right now. What is this life if full of care? We have no time to stand and stare. No time to stand beneath the bows and stare as long as sheep of as sheep or cows. Correct. No time to see when woods we pass where squirrels hide their knots in grass. No time to see in broad daylight streams full of stars like skies at night. No time to turn at beauties glance and watch her feet how they can dance. No time to wait till her mouth can enrich that smile her eyes began. A poor life like this full of care. We have no time to stand and stare. A life so poor we have no time to stand and stare. And the poverty of life is the ability not to enjoy nature, not to enjoy all the beauty that God created, right? Because we're so engrossed with our work that we have no time to stand and stare. And if you if you look listen to that properly, you also hear about you're not able to even see someone's smile. Yes, you've seen them, but you can't see their smile because you are so engrossed. And I feel like leisure has to be a goal that we set for ourselves. Rest has to be a goal that we set for ourselves. Um the same way we set financial goals, we set savings goals, we set investment goals, I think we need to set rest goals, we need to set leisure goals, we need to set fitness goals, we need to set health goals. They are equally as important.

So but but then um now that you're speaking with the benefit of hindsight. Yes. I think that I mean because this book speaks a lot about designing correct like designing your life and designing your business to function. Yes. What are some wisdoms that we would be able to get more in the book? Yes. That you have that you think most young and I say young because I would assume that you are the example. So let me let me let me set this context. So someone was inviting me to come speak at a place and they asked me they sent me a question in advance and they said how did you um know when it was time to start your own business? I said no I started after school I didn't work any other place I just started you are one of the rare ones too that did quite similar started in school and so you are like what I call the Nigerian dream you know the American dream the American dream I think absolutely I totally agree with you so what would you advise someone trying to start today in terms of designing a life that balances this because I think we've been sold a lot of grind grind hustle hustle do your and then you see someone that is 40 years old and they like 70 and you see their intestines and it's like they've overworked it. Yeah. Right. Um so I think the first thing is and I I'm got I've gotten the chance to I'm going back to campuses. Yes. You have a tour? Yes. Yes. I am doing campus tour and it's a campus prneur initiative because I started on campus. I started my business on campus and what I want to do is to go back into campuses to start teaching the frameworks of building beyond you so that no matter how small nano your business is this is what you're thinking because I wish that I had that from the very beginning of when I started um there are many mistakes I would not have made right so I think first thing that I would advise a young person is to be longterm driven is to ask yourself this business that I am putting my effort to build today. What would it look like in 30 years time? What would it look like in 50 years time? What it would would it look like in 70 years time? And dream about that. Envision it. Create pictures of what it would look like and then start to build with that in mind. Because when you build with long-term in mind, you build differently. M there are decisions that you take today that you say to yourself if I take this decision today it may be a short-term reaction but it has a long-term impact negative impact on the potential of me actualizing that picture that I saw my message in this season is let's be build beyond ourselves but for us to build beyond ourselves we have to envision a future envision 30 years 40 years 50 years from today to say this business what would it look Like I I had an episode um on on Saturday. I went into a House of Tara. I was going to travel to Ibadon for a funeral and I walked into a House of Tara store and the makeup artist who was there did my makeup, right? And suddenly I just felt a need to ask her age and I said, "How old are you?" And she said she's 24. And at that moment I realized that she was almost like three years old when I started the business. And I got emotional. I got emotional because I I was sitting in my dream that I dreamed that I would build a business that I will outlive me. I didn't even know her name. I had to ask her what her name was. Okay. So now people work in the business that are 24 years old that were babies when the business started. They didn't they didn't even exist. Some of them. Yes. And then I took the time to ask the other people in the room their age. And one person said she was 27. One of them was born the year the business started. what I was seeing was my my dream was a reality. I was living that dream. Um and I think I was very particular about about long term. Long-term was was a language the word that I use consistently. I always told people when we as the current operators are no longer here, I want this business to continue to be here. I want this business to continue to um thrive. I want this business to outle me. Uh I would describe myself as the current CEO of House of Tara. And I remember somebody asked me why do you keep saying current? I said because because I have a vision that I will not be the only CEO here forever. I have a vision that someday I will step aside and step away from it. And I think one of the things you get from the book is not is is that is the the the importance to see the importance of actually dreaming for the long term, aspiring for to see for the long term.

Another thing you'll see also is my story of my transition. And I remember when I announced that I was having I was handing over to a new managing director of the of for the business. I recall how the internet broke because of that. I mean to be sincere when I saw it I was like so and the reason I I did that is I am a geek for entrepreneurship like I studied globally and it's unfortunate that we don't have a lot of materials about our client. Correct. So when I saw it I was like somebody's doing it. Yes. We always hear about it, but we don't see. Yes. And she's not sick. She's not old. She didn't die. She's still vibrant. She's still active. She has the guts to do it. And I saw the way entrepreneurs responded. I saw the way the media responded. I just posted it on my page and before I knew it, it went viral. All the newspaper houses picked it up. It wasn't a press. I didn't do a press release. Really? What you saw? It wasn't an intentional. It was organic. Yes. And there was a guy who's very famous um uh famous uh commentator. He's a social commentator and generally criticizes things. So his things go viral on WhatsApp. Um the Duke of Shimolu. I don't know if you know him right. And someone just said to me, Duke of Sholu wrote about your handover. And I said, "Was it bad?" Cuz I expected it to be bad. But he was the most complimentary thing I've ever heard seen him write. and he gave his reviews around why he thought he was important, why he thought he was powerful, why he thought he was very proud that I did that. He didn't know who I was. And he in at some point he even said, "If you know her, please connect me with her." And when I saw the way people reacted to it, I realized that that desire that I have is a desire that many entrepreneurs have as well. And the question is, who's going to aggregate a platform that would give it the voice that is required, the message that is that is required? And luckily for me, I was already writing my book and it was actually called building beyond you. But I didn't tie it at that moment. No, I didn't tie it at that moment. Me, I thought everything was like a That's what my husband says. Everybody thinks that you are so strategic. Everything was strategic. No, I'm here with you. I know. It's not everything is strategic. Some things just align. They align with time. And sometimes it's not because you planned it. is just because at that moment there are many elements that are that you put out and for some reason they just start to align. When I study entrepreneurship globally Yes. and I see some founders there are founders who have stayed 40 years. Yes. Um I mean even um Nvidia guy I mean he's one of the longest serving um um founders you know and some of them even say that they are going to retire in their grave like the day they die is the day they leave that uh that role. So, and usually they explain it as is because they just for them is not work, it's just passion, right? So, and it's a nice idea, but seeing you say, you know what, I have I'm willing to leave this rain. It's going to be a lot of emotional, of course. And so, I want you to run us through because a lot of them are struggling. I mean, I'm talking about people even advanced clients that they're struggling. Yes. And typically say it's an African problem. We don't like to leave our office. Yes. So, but take us through the process like what happened in your mind.

I I think first of all there was a desire. There was a desire to build. What was the desire? The desire to build and hand over. Why? There was a desire that I saw success as my ability to be able to have a successor. That was my matrix. It was one of the matrix for shaping what success meant to me. Was this from the beginning? No, as I was building. Okay. As I was building, it became clear to me. Um, it also became clear to me at a point that my life still had a lot to offer beyond House of Tara. And I felt like I needed the expressions. I needed time to be able to express them. And House of Tara was a full-time job. not just a full-time job. It was my life at the time that it became it would be difficult for me to be able to express. So there was that that desire was also what was now drove the systems the structure that I put in the business so that that would give me the power to to focus on succession. So if if we were to think back in what year did you get like what what year in your journey was it at a pivotal moment of the 10th year or um so I can't I can't say whether it was a 10th year but I would say around um 20 maybe 2014 I had gone on a mentoring program and the mentoring program was at um was at um it was organized by the US state department okay and the fortune magazine Fortune magazine. So Fortune magazine put together this program with the US state department where they brought what they called rising stars from developing countries to the US to be mentored by senior executives in Fortune 500 companies in the US. Wow. I was picked from Nigeria and we had young women and all of us were in our maybe 20s30s at the time where all moved to the US to be attached to one female senior executive in a Fortune 500 company. Um, I was privileged to to be attached to the vice president of marketing at Exxon Mobile. And when I arrived at Exxon Mobile, what I saw was a an organization that was structured. I saw an organization that had been around for a very long time. I saw an organization with very strong values. I saw an organization that will I believe will still be here 30, 40 years from the time that I was experiencing it. And I think that inspired me. They gave me the opportunity to also go and um spend time at Mary Kay Ash because their headquarters was at Texas and Mary Kay Ash which is a beauty company that was founded by a female in her 40s was in Texas as well and what you saw yet again was the woman was no longer there but the business still existed. They took me around on a m around in the museum in her museum to her office. I think all those things set a desire for me yet again because you know become more and more the picture that we see. So I left I came back to Nigeria asking myself what examples exist in Nigeria that I could emulate and I wasn't seeing that and I think generally um you ask yourself what are the global standards what are the best practice and this is what I saw and I wanted to replicate I wanted house of Tara to be a place where young people will come tomorrow to the museum and I would no longer be there but the business will still exist. I loved that picture and I wanted to recreate it.

So that was what was driving me but it drove me um to take action. So immediately I returned back to Nigeria. I put together what I called a core value infusion campaign. And the core value infusion campaign was really about how do we what did I see in Exxon? I saw a company that was very strong on values. They had one particular value that I took away from that experience. And one of them was safety. And what did I notice the minute I arrived in the building? I wanted to drink. I was I wanted to send a text to my husband to say I had arrived. So I took my phone and was texting and the chaperon beside me said, "Oh, sorry. You can't text and walk in this vicinity like text and like take a text step. I cannot be walking and be texting." Okay. So I said, "Oh, really?" He said, "No, because it's not safe because you can trip." So I stopped. I got to my to the desk and then I said the type typed. I went to get coffee in the coffee machine. I got the coffee the cup and I was walking with it and they said, "Oh, the coffee the cup didn't have a lead. It didn't have a cover." And because it didn't have a cover, it was not safe to walk with it. So, I had to go back. So, in in in how many hours, I've already heard the word safety twice. Then I'm seated at the desk and the computer comes on and there's a message about safety on the screen. There postit on the table. The postit have quotes about safety. I go to the toilet. I sit on the toilet. The back of the door has messages about safety. Then we go to the restaurant and when we arrive in the restaurant the all these female executives are sitting down at the table hosting this Nigerian girl who came and then next thing the manager of the restaurant comes and starts a whole conversation to start to give us our menu and whatever. He starts by talking about safety about if there's a fire this and that and the other. So I asked them does it work for Exom Mobile? Because I was now hearing the same words and Exom Mobile usage. They said no he doesn't work at Exon Mobile but every restaurants that they use as an organization if they are mandated safety to institute safety as a culture as long as Exxon staff are in the room. I walked away saying this is the reason why this business still exists because they have strong core values. So I went back home to Nigeria. City may not be for us but the question is what are the things for us that will become our core value as a business and how can we build with those core values. That step of creating the core values, instituting the core values, enforcing the core values became my drive.

So you can see that I was already thinking about it. But also there was a moment where I knew and and entrepreneurship is about instincts. Yes. So you sometimes know things instinctively this product will do well. If somebody asked you why you knew, you just knew and there's something called intuitive intelligence. So my intuition said it was time time was coming for me to exit the business. And it was that intuition that helped me to start to take some decisions. So for example, your friend Chi-Chi was one of my midwives. We called we called her they were my personal board of directors and I said, "Girls, this is what's going on. This is what I'm thinking." And we created a WhatsApp group and the WhatsApp group was really was to guide me to say what are the things that House of Tara needs that you need to put in place before you exit and what are the things that you need to do to prepare yourself for the exit. Number one, what do you need to do to prepare the business for your exit? And how do you need to prepare yourself for the exit? So, how do I prepare myself for the exit? Number one, what does it cost to be me? How much do I spend? Okay, what are the things that House of Tara gives me today that if I step out, I will no longer have. Do I have the capacity to sustain those things? These were real questions that I had to ask myself. And then what will I do next? When you leave the day-to-day operations of running House of Tara, what would you do with your time? and and for so from a personal standpoint and then from a business standpoint assessing what are the things that the business needs that I that only I can do. I assess those things and my friends did a role their role play for me was to check that I was ticking those boxes on a daily basis. Wow. Yeah. And so when it was time to to hand over to a sex I was ready because number one I knew what it cost to be mean. I knew what I was going to do after I left House of Tara. may not have been clear but I was certain that there were multiple things that I could do and so I had confidence to be able to walk away from that business knowing that I was how did you choose a successor how did I choose a success so I think the first thing was um I started to look from within within the business within the business okay um not started I always looked I always identified people within the company who I felt I could hand over um I tried once it didn't work I tried twice it didn't work I tried the third time it didn't work. So three times it didn't work. What do you mean it didn't work? So these were people who I identified. Um and identifying them I now became committed to preparing them for the role. And as I was preparing them for the role it either the person leaves or I find they are not the fit. Okay. So how does this conversation happen? Like so in a scenario, do you necessarily tell them I want to make you no it's it's it's an information that I have in my head. Okay. You're not necessarily telling them I want to make you the next No, no, no, no, no, no. And and and to have at one point I had two people who I was managing at the same time. Yes. Which one of them would would work? Eventually I couldn't get someone from within. I brought someone from from without. now but bringing someone from without didn't mean that the person didn't know the business. The person was a part of the business externally but was not in the business at the time. Um and and so that was the what what that was the fit that I found eventually um to fulfill that desire to to find a successor.

Wow. So but did you at a point of like handing over did you feel restraint? No, I didn't feel restrained because I was ready. I was ready because I had been prepping. What? What did How long was this preparation process? About two years. I was for about two years. I was preparing. I mean, some people will say that short. Two years in terms of I know that I'm going to leave in so by did you fix a date? I didn't fix a date, but I fixed a time, right? I had given myself a timeline. So but the checking to know whether I was ready, it took me two years. It took me two years. So by the time I was handing over, I was more than ready because it wasn't a sudden, it wasn't something I did suddenly. It was something I had been talking about. My board was aware of we had discussed it over and over again. We had assessed. I think the greatest challenge was um what do you think after you exit House of Tara will be the next phase for you. I think that was the concern because I'm so young, right? Um it's not like I'm retiring or whatever. Um and the fear of you're so full of energy. Um you are someone who gets things done. How do then do you just suddenly not in a sense have something to do? I think that's where the concern was. But I think that's all sorted now. You can see that. Uh someone said, "I love this new face for you." Really? Yes. What were they referring to? The conference now the book and now I'm doing the tours um going to East Africa to Campala going to Tanzania going to Nairobi going to Kgali um and the book is now a bestseller on Amazon Canada and the US. So it it just shows that this message the message whose time has come. So now that you've done it I mean this is two years. Yes. Yes. Yes. Two years. Did you ever find yourself ever feeling like uh Yeah, of course. Ah, of course. You know, I gave up my office. You gave up your office. Oh my. And I loved my office. I loved my office. I love my office. But I gave it up. I gave it up because I knew that if I didn't give up that office, I would take it and collect it back. So you don't So you don't go into the building? What do you think is the reason I knew that she wasn't a makeup artist? This was me trying to test the whether she understood the code of dressing. Right? So I walked in. I know the code of dressing. That's why I know that she cannot be a makeup artist and have her hair like that. She now responds and says it's because she has her head to her face. You knew that she was not a makeup artist. Oh, so that's a good day. There are times where I've walked in where things were not right. So for example, I walked in and something had gone off, you know, in terms of uh uh facility. the facility and I asked the lady why hasn't this been fixed and she said to me um oh she had reached out to the admin da da da she gave all the stories and then I next question I asked her was uh what is the policy around when you reach out to admin and there is and you don't see any movement and she said it took her some time because she was not sure whether it was a trick question whether there's going to be punishment because of the But eventually she said you need to escalate. Escalating is a term that I I started when I was running the company. So I was happy to hear that she still knew that that that that term still existed and and you escalate. So it's not that everything has been perfect. There are times where I have to hold myself. The other day I was speaking to the MD's PA and apparently somebody was want staff wanted to see the MD and they said to the staff said oh the MD was not available for her to see. So I looked at the P and I said, "Oh, I hear that you gatekeep your MD from saying staff." And you could see my teacher coming out of Listen, the MD is here because of the staff. The staff are the internal customers. So the MD wants to see the staff want to see the staff better. I I was already getting so I had to hold myself back because hey, the P of the MD does not know me. Like he just said working for her. you've now come here and you want to take over the whole place, right? So, so there are moments where I've had to restrain myself. I've had to restrain myself around some changes in policies that I instituted when I was there. And and then to now hear that that has been changed and my first response is no, you cannot change it. Well, I mean, I think it will eventually come to the board or does the So, there are some things that can that are not at the board level. They are Okay. Yes, they're more operational, right? Yes. But but there are things that I I designed because of ABC D. But you know what? Things have changed. Um it's not the same. Um the the the the season has shifted. So and and policies are also supposed to be changed if amended if you know to keep with the times, right? Yes.

But have you ever gone to any of your outfits and seen like maybe they don't know you? Yes. How did Yeah. Yeah. So um I I went to the warehouse. So the warehouse um there are there is external security outside and there are certain people who are allowed to come into the warehouse. um and and then there are other people who you have to get approvals for them to come. So I came in to the place and wanted to come in because my name is one of the names on the list of people that should be let in. So he asked me if I had approval to come to the warehouse and I said no and he said unfortunately you can't come in. So the question for me was how to show him that my name is Tara and that I'm the ones whose name was on that list. So I had to get my phone and look on my passport and show him to say so basically I am the one of this business. Right. But that's the point. But that's but that's that's a testament to what you've built like building beyond you. I think that's really impressive. Yeah. Like you you know I don't care like I don't know you and there's this this is like your picture is on the wall. It's not. So your pictures on the wall that maybe I say okay. No I could even point to him and say that's me. That that is Yeah. But I had to bring out my my ID for him to see. So Oh, sorry man. Sorry, man. And that means it's not like you always frequented there to see him. No, because because security change because you have to you have to be careful, right? So from a security standpoint, it's also a part of the process that they change. Um and so they may not know who you are, right?

Okay. So let me talk about your journey with capital like in terms of attract starting it. Yes. um ex scaling it and then obviously transitioning from it. Correct. Ordinarily I would say I mean you started business before the age of VC capital. Yep. Nice things. Yeah. Nowadays how did you transition different capital needs of your business? Because as the business grows the capital needs evolve and then maybe you start to bring in external people. Yes. Can you run us through that journey as an entrepreneur? Yes. Um so first of all um I started you know I started my business from from um what you call angel angel investor yeah family and friends right so my my my my basically my own money right money that was given to me from home um so it was a small step in that I started the business with uh but when I I expanded to started manufacturing cosmetics um I I I grew the business organically so put reinvested back into the business. We invested back in the business and very lean when I didn't know what lean was but I was lean right in how I was running. So I put back a lot of money into the business and I and I you know when they talk about delayed gratification that was my second name. Uh I structured the way my spending was in such a way that um we continue to build capital for the business. So when it was time to expand, the business had enough um um capital to now expand into moving from just service from a service business producing our own my own very uh makeup line. Uh but there were two things that I now realized that I needed and the kind of capital of course at the time there were no VCs and things like that. Um I use creditors. Wow. Yes. So, one of the things that I did was number one, there were two things, two ways that I I now raise capital to expand that. Number one was to basically use my credibility to get people to deposit money before the product came. Well, okay. That way, the young ladies who were going to be distributors of my product deposited money in advance. In advance. And that cash I sent off to China to start our manufacturing. The second thing that I did also was credibility again for the Chinese manufacturer to send goods to me and allow me to pay instrumentally the power of credibility. Wow. And that was what capital was for me at the second stage. At the third stage, I now went to the bank. Uh unfortunately, the banks didn't understand beauty. Yes. Because it wasn't an industry that they understood. They they didn't see what how like how is there a business from makeup like Yeah. And of course, majority of the banks were run by men at the time. So that even made it worse because it means that they didn't even maybe if a woman even women but even women couldn't see but sort of get an idea. Uh but in this case it was it was a man and I and I remember having the chairman of my of my board um saying to me she would speak to the MD of of a bank uh for for me and she called him up and said this young lady who's doing amazing stuff with with this business. I want you to pay attention to her. I'm going I want you to give her time to come and see you. So I went to see her see him and we had a conversation and he he asked me about my business and I and I went and I shared about the business and at some point I said to him if you call the ladies on this floor on this floor where you are 10 you've called 10 of them eight of them recognize my face six of them have used my service or my product we can take a try but then what he decided to do was to look at my account so he went on his computer and looked at the account. What he saw was a consist was consistent deposits from across the country because we had beauty reps who were buying the product and distributing. We called them mini taras in different parts of the country from local ja to Benway from Makodi to Enugu. What he saw was number one the consistency. So he knew that the money that was the loan that he wanted to give me will be repaid. Yes. And why? Because he saw the revenue that was coming in, but not just the the volume, but the not just the total volume, what the frequency of it. And today, I know that that's what he did. But at the time, I thought he did me a favor, but no, he didn't do me a favor because bankers are looking to see a trend. Bankers don't favors. No, no. They were looking for a trend. and the numbers was data for him to make a decision. And that's the first time I got a bank loan. Um, and it was from that bank alone that I now expanded the product cuz we started with only three powders, uh, three, sorry, three eyeshadows and three lip glosses and we had had that for about two years and we needed to expand because in China had to do volumes. It meant that all the money was tied the small money that we had in was tied in inventory. But people needed options. So they've used your lip glosses, they love them. they lose your eye shadow but don't you have powder don't you have blusher don't you have uh you know what other products do you have and that's how we went to expand um zoo bank uh initially was community credibility yes family and friends correct.

And so far through these years have you ever so interestingly I had a conversation with uh a female entrepreneur also in Lagos but not on a podcast okay it was like a closed door session okay she runs a pharmacy chain Okay. And interestingly, it's quite aim similar trajectory. So when you're speaking, I'm like, huh, this sounds like this sounds like you guys were coming from the same textbook, you know. But I think that's just the Nigerian story, right? Cuz um credit is not just easily accessible, you know. So, but uh one of the things I asked her that day when she said her story was that I'm also an entrepreneur and I've not necessarily raised VC capital. Yes. How did you navigate um the social requirements of owning such a big brand or running so lean because they see such a big brand and but then you yourself as the entrepreneur you are running very lean trying to like expand it on your own capital. Yes. So that means that people expected that you had more money than you actually had access to. Yes. Or that you could actually spend on yourself. Correct. How did you navigate all of that and the social requirement of it? I think I was brutal. I was very brutal around it. What you call black tax. Yes. Um and I was branded as cruel by my family members because of that. Wow. Yes. And I don't care. Um, sometimes I ask you, do you know how many lipsticks? I have a member of my family in this room. That's why I'm looking in that direction. Do you know when you say you need 5 million? Calculate how many eye pencils? Thought that was to give you 5 million non. Um, so there were times where for example, um, there was expectations, um, of you should be able to do ABC. Um, and because I was reinvesting in the business, I couldn't and I was more and this is the power of having number one vision and long-term thinking. Because when you're thinking long term, you know that if you touch this money now, the business will suffer for it. But you can do this today so that you can have runway to be able to do so tomorrow. So today I can do things. I can build a house for my mom, right? But there were years before where she would ask me to do something for someone and I would say I can't because I I couldn't afford it. Or I would walk into somewhere and they'd say I expected you to have a more uh ABC car for example and I've had to have buy a generator because every store requires a generator. So what you're talking about was that I had a million billion naira business that required the assets that were expensive. Um we were now a retail chain and the minute you do you go into retailing the retail infrastructure didn't exist in Nigeria. It meant I had to build rent and build my own stores. I was just speaking to a developer today and he was asking me if I wanted to develop a piece of land that I had bought and I said I have P PTSD from developing I just I said I said I can't I said you know why I said because I built 20 something stores myself in Nigeria when I was in my 30s one year I built 10 stores I said do you know what it is to work with tapas I used to basically go wake up in the morning get in my car and go to my carpenters's workshop because when I give him money, I don't want him to use my money to do somebody else's job to make sure that that doesn't happen. I have to go and sit in his workshop so that he number one spends my money on my it work and to do those sort of things was tasking. It had it it had a cost. So that PTSD still that is the PTSD. So if you ask me about plumber, I don't want to hear about plumber. I don't want to hear about brick because I dealt with them. I dealt with brick layers. I dealt with plumbers. I dealt with carpenters. I dealt with painters. I dealt with think tilers. Yeah. And they're tiling a new store and the tiles break. This is not a time where you had sophisticated um interior design. You know, now we have all these interior designers who can be middlemen, right? Who you contract. At the time I was interior designer because number one, I designed the stores myself. Oh, really? Yes. We're talking about 20 something years ago in Nigeria. And now we have interior designers. They all this is a more recent development, right? These young people who who have traveled are exposed. They now have that that finesse. But at the time you dealt with multiple people to do your project. Yeah. It's more like you're the one you're the architect of your project. Yes. And so you do that. So you talk about the energy. Then you also talk about the financial the financial requirements. So you finished the building, right? Then you now have to put in some cases some of the stores you had to fix the road. Wow. Yes. Because the state government didn't do the work they were supposed to do. And after a while the local government got upset that you had the audacity to fix the road and they punish you for it because when you fix the road it means that somebody who was supposed to do it didn't do it and therefore there's a there's a consequence for that. And by you're doing it you're basically saying they didn't do it. Do you see? So I mean I don't want to go into some of the challenges of building your own retail infrastructure but that was very tasking. So to now expect me to do all this and then start funding all manner of things because I'm seemingly rich. I refuse to do that. And and the second thing I disciplined myself around doing was building my own personal wealth outside of household tara. Yes. And and and I explain what that means. And a lot of entrepreneurs don't do that. That's why they also find difficult to leave. Um I like I like this part. Yes, I earned a salary like everybody else. The board approved a salary for me to earn. I earned and I earned well. But based on the salary that I earned, I invested every single month for as long as I remember. It's so bad now that I get a high on investing. It's just like if I'm feeling sad that I just go and invest because I'm so used to what kind of what kind of stocks stocks anything stuff I'm doing like I just said to you I just had a conversation I didn't call out from the car because I was talking to developers right I'm constantly because I'm now I've trained myself to be that way um and so so sometimes entrepreneurs have all their money in their business and that's what happened to me when I had the meeting with the MD of the bank he asked me did I have collateral for the loan and I didn't have I said to him my stock was my collateral when they saw the value of stock that I had it was a lot and he said to me promise me the next time I see you you would have diversified your investment so your investment would not only be in this business and I felt a little offended by that because remember the business is my baby like it's my everything is my this is what my money should be yes but he was talking because of experience so the year after I paid the loan I bumped into him somewhere and I said sir I just wanted to let you know that I paid back the loan he said I knew you were going to pay back the loan now I No, it wasn't because he just knew. He saw it. Yeah. My numbers told his story and that number told him that I was going to pay back. He sent me an email after that and said, "Do you want the loan to be renewed?" And yes, they renewed the loan, but he then said to me, "Promise me that you're going to diversify." And he start said he said to me, "Start buying real estate and you don't have to start from just start from somewhere." And and I started doing that. And so when I was walking away from house of tar even if I don't work for one year I can still maintain the lifestyle that I was leaving because I diversified my investment.

Ordinarily I would have thought maybe the dream would have been to sell like maybe I mean have you had those kind of temptations? Yes I have. um the biggest biggest beauty company in France approached what? Yeah. And they and they ced me for about three years. I remember going to being invited to Paris um and sitting with the chairman of of of that company and he shared with me how my story is similar to his grandfather's story who started the company and and how his passion for his country his passion for empowering people and um it was beautiful to hear and it was beautiful to see and the potential acquisitions all the acquisitions that they had done across the world and how I could become part of that family. Um, and it it sounded nice, but it wasn't what I wanted to do at the time. Um, so I didn't I didn't take it, but I allowed the process I allowed the business to go through the process because I wanted to also see to test what we had, how viable it was, how solid it was. I think the ex the experience made me know that I had built something solid. um a because um they spend time with the employees across the country. Um they spend time going through our processes. At the time um we had engaged PWC to do our our audits. So um they engaged with PWC at the time as well and so they could see our numbers as well. They could see the solidity around our finances. Um, I think that that made me comfortable that we could go through that rigorous process and come out and they would make an offer and still want to acquire and still want me to be a part of the business um for an extended time. That I thought for me was a markoff of um I was doing something right, but I wasn't sure that I wanted the company to be owned by a French company at the time. So why um I I think that when we make decisions we have to ask ourselves was that what we wanted. What did I want to be acquired by a French company? No it that was not my desire. That was not my it was that would have been a good exit. Yes. I was 30 36 37. Oh wow. Yeah. Did I want to exit my business? No. No, exit was not remember that this conversation around exit is a it's quite a new it's a new maybe if they came to me today and I would say oh that's a fantastic exit but exit wasn't a thing at the time. It was also unusual for a French company with pure desiring to buy a Nigerian company was it was strange even my board couldn't believe it. Wow. Yes. But but you guess what? My chairman wanted me to sell. No. Because she thought that I would be tired soon. No. No. I mean, I don't think she was wrong, but not as soon as as then though. Yep. But she was right. She was right because then after uh our products were counterfeited. I was going to touch that, but yes, our products were counterfeited. And now I had to find counterfeits myself. Whereas if I had had an institution behind me, they would have brought the weight of their office to the counterfeiting. And that was another moment that I think I suffered um a kind of trauma that I don't think I fully recovered from really as a person. Yes. Because because counterfeits um there's a threat to life. Yes. You know, so I went to Alaba. I went to a trade fair and I was I was confronted and said you know don't come back here and come and say you are looking for people who are counterfeit your products you get killed do you know am poor so am poor was a a fragrance company that they used to have these fragrance that you put in the sockets okay I don't know if you remember the brand and it was all over Nigeria at a point that suddenly it disappeared yes yes yes I don't they count the products but the guy was he came I was fighting He shot his legs. He just came to trade fair one day and someone just walked past and shot his legs. And this is real, right? In Nigeria. In Nigeria, right? Um I had to fund um raids. You pay for them to go and raid knows. And you pay a regulator because they'll say to you, you need to it's not you're not you're mobilizing them. So they have to put a foil in the car. You hear that there's potential counterfeit here, there, there, you tell them, they now go, then you mobilize them. I mean, I was doing this. It wasn't a it wasn't one conglomerate that was doing it. It was me who was deciding what when we should go, where we should go, how we should go. I was dealing with deciding what how to if you want to differentiate the product cuz the counters did a good job. you can almost not tell except you were me or you were very close to the business to be able to tell. So that that was one moment where I felt like I was um I was hit, you know, when they say they hit someone by the side. Um I was hit by the side and I'm not sure that I fully ever recovered from the number one the amount of stress that it takes to fight counterfeits. Um, and there are many, but I look back and I'm also grateful because there are many beauty brands that came to Nigeria, international brands that died that were killed because of counterfeiting. Tara wasn't killed because of counterfeit because I fought back. But I fought back at a cost. What was the cost? The cost was the pain, the sore, the scar that I still feel when going through that stress of fighting. That's the cost. It's still there. It's still there. And it's not something that I wish for anyone because when you build a brand um your your brand credibility is so much value. Yeah. There's so much value in it. I went to China. I mean that's that's the reason why they contemplated. Yes. For sure. So I went to China and I get to China and they they're trying to convince me to buy my own product because they don't know it's me. Wow. Yeah. You know what that means? It means that they're then showing you all the countries where they've exported your products to in that moment. You you've seen everything you've built disappear. Remember, you're thinking longevity. You're thinking long term. This will kill the business very quickly. this counterfeiting and and it the question is where when your distributors are buying the counterfeit because they want the pricing prices to be lower you can't tell who it is that's selling both and so you become an investigator then you become the regulator then you become the financeier then you become the campaigner so I had to use social media at the time worked with some of the Mollywood actresses at the time Funka Kindle was very passionate because she had problems with piracy and stood with us and just basically created awareness um got friends and and family members to just create awareness and basically our customers were now the ones fighting fighting the counterfeits at the end of the day but it was it was a lot was a lot um I got invited to um to have a conversation with someone who had come from the US and she worked for the US government and when she left my office I realized that the reason why she had come to see me was not because oh I was just this amazing business woman. No, the US government had sent us to come and have a conversation with me so that they could protect US brands and for me where was my government where was my government who did my government go to to seek especially because I was a pioneer and I felt that that par status should have given me some advantage and I should have gotten support that I didn't get I was I think um the minister of finance at the time Kyadu Um I was on a panel where I raised this conversation and she picked it up and asked me a question said who is it that you feel I can talk to that can help and and you know sorry to say this but this is what how women are a woman will hear that and who's in that kind of position I want to fix it whereas the minister of of of um of trade of trade I had had a conversation with him and his response to me was it's not within my perview. was what he said. Now when I was on a panel and I was basically just saying, you know, this is the decision I found myself in. She was on that panel and she said to me, "How can I help?" Unfortunately, remember, she had some crisis and she had to she had to leave. Yes. But I'm sure if she was there, she would have made sure yes to support. But I didn't get any support. So I did all that by myself. And the question for me was if I had sold the year before, would I have had to fight by myself? Probably. I mean, you would have you would have It's their business. It's their business. Their business. So, do you think you've won the fight? Do Do I Have you won the fight? Do you I think I won the fight for sure. I won the fight because I'm still here. The brand is still here. Brand is still here. Because what counterfeitters do is that they make sure that by the time they are done, you'll be out of business. You you will be out of business. They would have made money. Then they move to the next product that they're going to counterfeit. So, they were not able to do that. First of all, I pulled out of the market. Oh, and because I had my own stores, I focused on my stores. I had my own I didn't depend on the their own infrastructure. I had my own. And this is the thing about being a Nigerian entrepreneur is that you don't stick with you don't put all your eggs in one basket. Yeah. So, I had my own retail infrastructure which meant that my customers would come to my stores across the country. But I also had an army of of beauty reps, the Tara girls across the country who were selling mini. Yes. who are selling? Am I focused on those? Am I focused on my stores? Um and and then partnered with some other established platforms that I could trust um that I knew personally that I could trust and pulled out of the open market. It cost me money because it meant that I also lost money in terms of the revenues that come from field sales. But I was ready to do that to clean out the market than so that you knew that the products wasn't available in the market. So if you went to the market and you bought anything, you knew it was fake. So if you want to buy, you come to a Tara store or you go to a Tara Rep. And that's what I did. It was it was tough um to make that decision to pull out of the open market, but it was what I did. Now, do you see the fake of it anymore? Hardly because in a way um I forced them out of Do you think every products like that's like in terms of manufactured products that will be Nigerian or African would have to I think that's a battle they must all fight. They must be ready to fight it. They must be ready to fight. Yes. uh when my book came out the the way that I have been so militant so I self-published about it it's because of experience we are doing an East African tour and they want the book to be printed in East Africa and I said to them no I wouldn't print in East Africa I would only print where I can control and the reason why is because I've suffered this before and I'm not going to allow it to happen a second I heard a statement that the reward of entrepreneurship is not actually who you it's not actually what you get but who you become at the other side of the pursuit. Yeah. Who have you become or who has entrepreneurship made you entrepreneurship has made me resilient. Uh the ability to be able to bounce back quickly is one thing that entrepreneurship has taught me. Entre entrepreneurship has also taught me to be meek because it humbles you. Uh when you think you're all so powerful, something happens that proves to you that you're not that powerful and and that uh when that hits you, your meekness quotient increases. I like that question. Entrepreneurship has taught me to be forgiving. Um but also to not be blindly trusting uh because you experience a lot of cheats, a lot of betrayal, um a lot of let down on that journey. But it forces you to become as wise as a serpent. Uh but in the same vein forces you to be as gentle as a as a dove. Yeah. But I think entrepreneurship has forced me to be resilient. It's forced me to be forgiving. It's forced me to be to to be meek. Um but it also has forced me to become like a phoenix, you know. Um where you go through it but you come out refined. Yeah.

Would you, they asked Dangote recently, if he knew what he knew now, would he do it again, like build a refinery? And I I thought that was a very interesting question. And what was his answer? He said, "No, he won't." Yeah. Yeah. Because he went through hell fire. He's still going through the fire. Yeah. Yeah. Um and I think that's why God doesn't show us the end. Yeah. Because we'll surely not go that path. Um, if I knew what I know today, will I do it all over again? I will, but differently. I will because I enjoyed the journey of doing it. I love the person that I became in the process of doing it. Um, I went to Ibado and I saw a makeup artist in the car park of the church serving a customer and I was proud of what I started. I think you started the entire industry. Really? Yes, I did. I did. And I was proud of what I saw. But I was also asking myself if I had known that it would be this impactful, I would have taken it even more seriously. And my PA said, "More seriously? More than what you have? How seriously you took it?" And I said, "Yes, I would have taken it more seriously because the size of the the stretch the reach of the impact is incredible." Yeah. I did a lot for the industry. I tried to professional I professionalized it. Um I set very high standards. People's children could say to their parents I want to be I want to do this and they would say okay fine. Um she's a lawyer who's become a makeup artist that has now built a beauty company. Um so when I look back I'm very proud of the impact of the work that I did. So I will do it again but I will do it differently. Save myself some of the heartbreaks that I experienced. Uh but but I'll still do it again. But let me let I didn't get um a a clear answer to that question. Would you if you were to would you sell now? Will I sell now? H good question. You never know. Will I sell now? I don't know actually. Or do you want to just keep it proudly Africa? I'm not sure that whether that is what the issue is. Oh, really? Yes. I I think that No, that's not the intention. It's not to sell. The intention is still to build it more. It's not to sell. Yeah. It's not to sell. And do you think another Tara can come up in the same beauty sector? Cuz I I think your pathway is quite hard. Tell me. It's your turn. So yeah, tell me. So um when you say another Tara, what do you mean? Like tomorrow we'll see another beauty brand. I mean America has Mary Kay Ash. Yes. You have uh Avon. I mean like I could name so many. Yes. Um and it's quite interesting that even what I mean what's her name? Rihanna. Yes. Did Fenty. Um I think you pioneered that. Yes. Unfortunately it's looking like Yes. When you come from a developing country, there are so many restrictions. Exactly. So, where I'm getting at is in terms of our climb. Yes. Do you think it's positioned to create another t? I think that that's a clearer question because ordinarily if you were if you were in the US, yes, you'll be much much bigger. Yeah. Much much bigger. I I think I think yes. And what and what what are things that you think would help that? I think so. I think I think I think digital I think uh the power of technology um I think another Tara but another Tara that's powered by technology which is one of the reasons why I said if I I got the chance to do it I'll do it differently. I feel like there they can be another Tara and they probably will be because I spent time now with some upcoming entrepreneurs and I'm beginning to see something that's different. Um they also have more information than I had. Uh now they have my book around building structure beyond. Yes. And it took me many years to get there. Today it's going to take some people less because they have that information that I didn't have. Um so I do believe that they can be another T. The only thing they can't be there can't be another pioneer. M I pioneered that industry, set it off, created the ecosystem that cannot be replicated because it's done and dusted. But there's room for other people to build upon the foundation you said. Correct. Correct.

So, thank you very much, I must say, for this book. Uh I think that's where I want to end the conversation talking about the book and your talk. So, this book I believe Nigeria we lack a lot of business uh stories. That's why I actually started the podcast and especially stories that show you sincerely. Yes. No, you're not the one that So, we always have a general self-doubt about most stories because you're like, you don't know what this person really did, you know. Um, so thank you very much for this material. I'm going to read it. I will do a review video on it. That's I know I will do. Uh, I love stories like I look forward to it. Yes, I I will send you I'll send it to you when I do. Um, what should we expect from reading this book? The you said about a framework like the free book. Yes. Can you just give us a Yes. Bite-sized? Yes. Um, what would you get from reading the building beyond you book? I think number one, um, you will get relatability. Number one, it is a person and a brand that you know, okay, that you touch, feel, and see. is truly Nigerian. Okay. So, you'll get relatability. The second thing you will get is you'll get a determination um and an inspiration to transfer the desire for structure to reality because there will be step by step things you take around building structure around people, building structure around your finance, building structure around your operations. There will be tangible things that you can take away. Um many of the chapters have um reflection pages. So I observed I observed that as well. Yes. So it gives you the opportunity to talk about the things you you should start doing, the things you should stop doing and the things you continue to do because of the rel relatability of the story. You will see yourself in it. People said they couldn't read the book all at once. They couldn't sit and read the book all at once because they found that they had to stop to reassess. Stop to reassess. I think you could also um at the end of the day recognize that there was a very strong God factor. I invite people to my journey of faith. Um and for those who haven't found the Lord, they'll get the chance to see how I tied it to my transition, the transition of my business, how there was both a spiritual and a strategic approach to handing over. and my desire is to see more people decide to be discipled uh because of my story as well. So there's a lot of things in the book. Um it's also a book that teaches you the power of support systems. People say I was named dropping in the book. Um but the book has a lot of names and that's because I'm a relationship person. Uh my social capital is for me one of the biggest uh wealth um that you take care of. Yeah. that I take care of and I and you can see the reference to people who supported me from the early days to the to the to the latter days of my time at House of Tara. Um you see the names there because I wanted them to know that I remembered and I wanted them to be recognized for it. I think the last thing you're going to thoroughly enjoy are the reviews. Uh we have almost three or four pages of reviews from people from around the world from Argentina to Ghana to Zambia um to Aruma Otter to Le Alder um to faith leaders to young lead youth leaders as well just the diversity of reviews and what they felt about reading the book is in itself remarkable and at the end when you read Mrs. Aishika's forward. People just thought it was the book itself, the forward. But then if you read V's afterward, it's the afterward that is deserving of a vi. Yeah. And you're going on tour? Yes, I'm going on tour. Yes. Super excited about that. Starting Yes. in Abuja here uh at Ring Heights and then um going to Ibadon and also going to Potangot. Super excited to be going to Wigu University. Yes, I saw that. Yes. So we're going to be on the on campus. Uh we're also going to do University of Ibadon and then back again um to go going to East Africa starting from university. Okay. That's my alumni. Okay. Okay. Noted. Noted. Noted. So we go to Nairobi and then Uganda and then Kgali Rwanda and then Dar Salam and then after that we go off to North America and Canada and then come back again to the continent to southern Africa. Thank you so much man.

I have a question for you off script. Okay. We started the conversation earlier and this actually is going to be caught separately. So let me just so that he's still also aware. We spoke about a conversation about um strong women and you raising strong men that will be able to collaborate. What are your words of wisdom to young men and young women growing up today who are facing the issue around identity. Um in terms of I mean you had I think from all your story I saw a strong um component of identity like you came into it very early. Yes. What exactly do you have as a message to um I I I feel I think I I think being certain of who you are is very critical. Um, I've had situations where one of my sons would often say to me, "Mom, what do you think about this or that or the other?" And I'll go back to him and say, "What do you think?" And I want you to first of all tell me what you think before I tell you what I think and why. Cuz I want you to have your own um how you see things, your own perspective. And I want you to share your perspective. I can give you an impute, but I don't want to want I don't want to be the one to shape that. And and the reason why I feel it's important because it it shapes your worldview. It also impacts how you solve problems when you experience them in the world. The question for me is how did I find my own identity? I found my identity in the manufacturer of the product. As a Christian, um I think that's where I found my peace. I found my grounding. I found my certainty and I've found my clarity. Um, so my charge to everyone who's young out there is to find your identity in God because you didn't manufacture yourself. You manufactured by someone and who's that someone is God Almighty, the one who created the world. And it's he who knows who you are. Spend time with him. And the more time you spend with him, the more you know of yourself. The more time you spend with him, the more you know of yourself. The less time you spend with Helen, the more confused you'll become.

They say your life is basically an unveiling of all God has ever written concerning you. Yeah. Like you're fulfilling the books. Do you think that's the secret behind the house of Ty? For sure. For sure. I still thought about it today. Um, I saw parts that were not planned on this book journey on the You saw how successful the conference was. We had over 1,300 people. I was planning in seven weeks. It wasn't something that I had one idea 5 years ago that I was going to host a conference. No. Um, it's the same thing with the book. The book became a bestseller even before we we did a public launch of it right in Canada and then it went to the US. And what I saw were parts, moving parts that I didn't have control over that just seemed to align. And for me, it's the hand of the one that we do not see with our eyes who's moving those parts. And I said to my husband as I was leaving the house today, I said, I want to walk away from this home as I go to my tour with a strong sense of gratitude because of the assurance of the person who's moving the puzzles. So I'm going to Abuja carrying a sense around me that the one who I can't see is moving the puzzles and I'm seeing the alignment as the puzzles have moved. the coincidence that I created a conference that's called building beyond you whereas I had a book in my laptop that's called building beyond you that I didn't remember that I had been writing for many years suddenly it looks strategic it looks like you had this building beyond you conference planned and you had a book planned that you were going to release no the book I had been writing seven years ago and I couldn't finish the book and I didn't know why I couldn't finish the book the reason why I didn't finish the book because the story hadn't ended And the ending of the story was going to be my transition. And the transition hadn't happened seven years ago. It was when the transition happened and I stepped away from the business and I was now looking for oh what am I going to do? I said oh maybe I should go and finish my book. I sat down one day and for some reason the ease of writing just came and I started to type and I wrote one chapter. I sent the chapter out to my husband. He's like, "Oh my god, this is so beautifully written. This should be the end of your book." I'm like, "Really?" And then I went back to it looking at the book from that lens and it made sense. Guess what? Guess what? It was my the book had ended at chapter nine that wasn't closing. This was chapter 10 and it closed at chapter 10. And chapter 10 is probably the most beautiful chapter in in the in the book. So there are moving parts that are orchestrated by the invisible one and if we can submit to his hands and allow him to align we'll be fine.

What routine did you have through your years in building that kept you connected to the invisible one? I think one of them is carrying a consciousness of his presence. Um and you can do that by prayer by time of time times of prayer. So you spend a lot of time praying in the spirit and it pray in the spirit is a part of my lifestyle. It's now a lifestyle thing and the reason why is because it forces me to carry a consciousness of God's presence. Um I also have a habit of taking time off to retreat. How often? So I started with once a year about nine years ago. I would take a 5 days, switch off my phone and go somewhere and leave my phone at home and spend time in prayer, worship and the word. Uh but as I become older, I've increased it twice a year. Now I do it every quarter because I enjoy it so much that I want to be there all the time. Just the ability to switch off my phone, get on the train because I go to somewhere where I can take a Nigerian train. I get the driver drops me off at the train station. I hand him over my phone. I get on the train. I get picked up by the same person every year on the other side so he knows what I look like. He's not allowed to talk to me. We don't talk to ourselves. He drops me off where he's supposed to drop me off. I get in there and I'm by myself. I don't speak to anyone. I don't play with technology. I just spend time in prayer in silence. So I can hear my thoughts. I can hear the silent one's voice more clearly because there are no interruptions and I often come back so refreshed. One time I came back and my husband says he felt like locking me up in a room just so that he could just keep enjoying the way I looked after coming back from that experience because like Jesus Christ it's quite an experience. It's quite an experience. If you spend five days by yourself, not talking to any human and just spend time in prayer and in silence, you'll be surprised the kind of ideas, the kind of thoughts, the kind of strongholds that fought as a result. So those are some of the routines that I have cultivated. So that is the secret behind the glue. That's a good place to end. I like that. Thank you so much, TMD. Really grateful for making our time for this. Thank you. Oh, thank you. I thoroughly enjoyed.