Hi Tony, it's so great to have you here. Thank you for being with us today. You are one of the most celebrated and most decorated business leaders in Africa, and I would posit the world, so it's truly an honor to be able to host you at Stanford this afternoon. Thank you very much.

We watched a video earlier where we learned a little bit about the Foundation, which we'll speak about towards the later half of the interview. But we saw there that you're such a supporter and such an advocate of entrepreneurship, which isn't really a surprise because your parents were entrepreneurs. I'm curious to know how seeing them build businesses at a young age influenced you and impacted your journey.  

So I'm pleased and honored to be with you all today. Stanford, a great university, and a team from this great university visited the Tony Elumelu Foundation before the pandemic, I think. And I was quite impressed—they were on time in spite of the chaotic traffic situation in Lagos, and the research work was also very, very impressive. So for me, coming back here is such an honor. I have a great impression of your school.  

Entrepreneurship is in my DNA. I preach entrepreneurship, I encourage entrepreneurship. I also try to catalyze more entrepreneurs in Africa, because in my own life journey, I've come to appreciate the significance and importance of entrepreneurship in transforming families, in transforming self, in transforming communities, in transforming countries, societies, and humanity entirely.  

And when we founded the Tony Elumelu Foundation, it was driven by the need and urgency to help catalyze development in Africa at a scale that's sustainable, realizing further that entrepreneurship is the way to that. I was privileged, lucky, blessed to have been mentored in this journey of entrepreneurship first by my parents, especially my mom, who was an entrepreneur on a small scale. But the lessons I imbibed watching her, supporting her, continue to help me to date.  

And it's also critical in the message and advice I give to young entrepreneurs. I learned from her about hard work. She was extremely, extremely hard-working. At the time to date, she's just turned 94, and she's still very hard on me! She will cook for me, and I driver to come apologize, pick food, and I'm like, "Mom, I have somebody to cook for me." But that spirit in her remains ever so strong.  

She was disciplined, and I have come to realize that this journey of entrepreneurship—they say before I know entrepreneurship, everything in life—discipline is critical for success. She was extremely tenacious, and I've come to see, and I preach too, that the journey of entrepreneurship is not a linear journey. It's up and down. But if you're tenacious, if you are resilient, you cross the finishing line. So those are part of the early learnings from my parents, my mom.  

My dad long ago told us, and the reason is in my brain today: that if you earn a dollar and you're unable to save, if you earn a billion dollars, you will not save anything. So that for me is the first lesson in capital formation. Capital formation starts from savings. If you do not save, you don't have money to invest. If you don't invest, you remain where you are. And so these lessons have helped me in this journey of entrepreneurship.  

So let's fast forward a few years. You graduate from university with a bachelor's and master's degree in economics. You then proceed to become one of the youngest bank branch managers in Nigeria, typically a job reserved for people who are in their 50s or 60s. You become the managing director of one of the biggest banks in Nigeria. And then 2005 comes around, and you are being asked to help lead what becomes like the biggest merger in Nigeria's corporate history. What were some of the challenges that you faced during that time, and which leadership principles did you stay rooted in as you were guiding this process?  

At the time, quite a lot of challenges, but just to contextualize to understand it: we took over a distressed bank called Standard Trust Bank in 1997, and in 2005, we merged Standard Trust Bank and United Bank for Africa. But before the merger, there was an acquisition. Standard was acquiring significant interest in United Bank for Africa, then we merged, and I emerged the CEO.  

So first, you saw United Bank for Africa as almost 70 years old as an institution, and set in its ways of doing things. Then digital adoption was not so strong, and so at times it took people months to read emails. And in terms of service delivery, those days the old-generation banks were not so strong on service delivery. And we were coming from a bank that was so strong in service delivery and technology, young people, etc.  

So a bank the size of less than 1,800 people and United Bank for Africa had about 12,000 staff. This 1,800 younger, technologically advanced, and this other one older and a very big bank. So it's not easy integrating, because as you see in corporate mergers, the legal combination is not the issue. The difficult part is the people integration, the cultural integration—that is the tough part.

And so, and if you can see from history, most corporate institutions, it takes so many years to integrate people and culture. And if you do not integrate people and culture properly, you lose the major value levers. And so we were mindful of this. I wanted to make sure we were able to merge, integrate. And this is a financial institution that was like... you merge today, customers don't care whether they want to be served by the same institutions, they move them.  

There was a tough part integrating our people, merging our people, merging cultures—an old culture set in their ways and a vibrant younger culture. But therein lies the interesting aspect of the combination of the job. I say to people: my elder brother, who is seven years older than me, he doesn't have grey hair. I have grey hair! My grey hairs are there from the corporate merger, because making it work, serving your customers, making sure that everyone in the universe of the institution—which was 428 branches at the time—that it was the same level of service across the board. Customers at Standard Trust Bank that were used to a certain level of service delivery, you would not want them to come to the new institution and have a drop.  

So we just had to make sure that service... we put our customers first. And that's why today United Bank for Africa, which interestingly has grown from a one-country bank to a bank that operates in 20 African countries, with presence also in Paris, London, recently Dubai, and the only African bank that operates in the U.S. with a deposit-taking license... it started small, it's gone that big. And that experience during the merger continues to guide what we do, especially how we prioritize our customers and how we prioritize our people.  

So I would say the biggest lesson from that combination was our people—integrating our people and culture. It was realizing that, especially in the service sector where you sell intangibles, so to speak, it is very important that your core army, your workforce, that they are fully aligned, totally integrated, and positively mobilized and motivated. If you have this, you can make progress. And those lessons from the early days—resilience, hard work, discipline, staying focused, prioritizing people—have all helped us in creating today's United Bank for Africa.

And as you mentioned, you all were able to do that very successfully. You expanded from being a single-country bank to one that operates in more than 20 countries in Africa, and then has an impact and influence and reach in other countries as well. Many of us are interested in working in emerging markets or building, developing products or services for emerging markets, or one emerging market to begin with. I'm curious to know: how do you evaluate which markets to enter when you are expanding United Bank for Africa, and how do you determine when's the right time to do so?  

So first, most times people see the empty part of a glass. At times, we see also the full part of the glass. You would always have difficulties and challenges in almost every sector, especially countries you want to go into. So when we decided to expand into Africa, the story was... first, we thought that we had mastered how to serve customers, because that's what banking is about: it's about serving your customers, all about customers, customers, customers. And realizing that to serve your customers, you must have a mobilized workforce that's aligned with the mission and vision that you see for the group.

So we felt, looking at the African landscape, that we had opportunities. We thought Nigeria was, and remains, the largest economy in Africa, and we thought that the level of banking or service support was very high, and now we should leverage this and spread across the continent. And we had to decide: which country should we go to? How do we decide the country? Macroeconomic stability, policies, foreign policies, ease of doing business in countries, taxation policies in countries, and the demographics of countries. Because we were quite set to support small and medium-scale enterprises—that is the bedrock of United Bank for Africa.

So based on that, we came up with 30 countries that met the internal criteria. We settled... at UBA, we developed what we called the UBA Redwood, which explained Africa issues to consider, etc. But in all of those issues, the ease of doing business in countries was very critical to us. The population was also important. The GDP of countries, income per capita was important. Ease of finding the right human capital to work with, because again, human capital is a people business, so that was very important to us.

And we came up with all of this. We now cleared it into what we developed and called the three-tier strategic intent. Tier 1 was we wanted to be strong in Nigeria. Tier 2: be a leading pan-African bank. And Tier 3: being global, having presence in global financial centers, which is why we talk about London, Paris, New York, Dubai—it's all part of our three-tier strategic intent.

The second one therefore, orchestrating our expansion in Africa, and under that was: what strategy do we do? A country strategy or not? Pass-through or have presence in countries? And we decided that we needed to have presence in countries. And next was: okay, how do we tier the countries again? We used GDP, so we tiered the countries and we said, rolling out: greenfield, brownfield, acquisition, mergers—how do you want to grow? We decided that we'd do a combination of both.

So in the countries we went to, some countries we acquired banks, some were merged, and some we started greenfield. And the journey is, so far, so good. Today, United Bank for Africa serves over 35 million customers in Africa and is still growing. We're helping to simplify payments on the continent, we're helping to orchestrate trade transactions, intra-Africa trade transactions.  

Prior to this time, Africa did not trade with and amongst itself. Or we believe the reason Africa didn't do this is because of payment issues, because of even infrastructure, transactional infrastructure, and also making sure we support capacity for small and medium-scale businesses to grow. So UBA has done quite a bit in this space.  

And most importantly, financial inclusion: trying to make sure that everyone... on a continent with about 1 billion people, the banked population is not so high. So to us, it's not just about banking or offering banking services; it's about what we call the democratization of access to financial services. It's about financial inclusion. So making sure that almost everyone in markets where we operate has access to banking facilities and banking services.  

And that's why in some countries we spear-headed and pioneered the opening of bank accounts with zero balances, because what's important to us is to be able to attract people. We believe that Africa has an informal economy that is very large, and all of us should be involved in trying to formalize the informal economy. And this is one of the ways we are doing so through our banking services.  

In other areas of our operations as a group, we're trying to do the same thing. What we do at the Tony Elumelu Foundation is all, again, about helping to develop the continent: financial empowerment, taking opportunities to people irrespective of your level in society, where you live, whether in urban or rural areas. So those are things we need to keep doing to create a more inclusive society, especially in Africa.  

You alluded to this a little bit earlier: there's a lot of innovation happening in the financial services industry, a lot of tech disruptors, many of which are working towards that goal of democratizing access to financial services. From your position as CEO and now Chairman of United Bank for Africa, how do you see the company collaborating or even competing with some of these disruptors, particularly thinking about new technologies like cryptocurrencies, peer-to-peer payments, etc.?  

First, I was CEO of UBA about 12 years ago, so today I don't see myself as a banker per se. I'm an investor that invests in banking, in helping to improve access to electricity on the continent—a critical resource deficit on the continent that's important to breach if Africa must leapfrog and move the continent to where it should be. We're investors in the healthcare sector, having realized that indeed health is wealth. If the pandemic taught us one thing, it is about prioritizing health and realizing that what war couldn't do, health or lack of it can do! Who would have thought that the entire world would go into a lockdown mode? I didn't know or think that could happen in my lifetime!

So we're investing in that sector. We're investing in energy, the full energy chain, because again, for a continent like Africa, it's critical.

So for us, or for me at this point, I'm not so much of a banker. However, as a group, we realize the importance of technology. These digital disruptions that we see in the world are real, and in Africa in particular, thanks to the youth population of our continent, we know that we have to catch up. If we don't catch up, we're going to be left behind.

And for businesses we are associated with, like United Bank for Africa and other businesses, digital adoption is critical for service delivery, for everything that we do. So in the payment space, we lead in the payment space through digitization, through adoption, partnership with fintechs and all kinds, just to make sure that we're able to serve our customers. Today's customers, they don't need a bank—they need a facilitator for payments, they need a facility that fits their lifestyle.  

And banking is changing. It's changing from the way we used to know banking so many years ago. Today, I tell you, at United Bank for Africa... earlier I told you that we have 35 million customers. A few years ago, in 2005 when we did the merger between Standard Trust and United Bank for Africa, all of 2004 UBA celebrated that it was the first bank in Nigeria to have 32 ATMs—32 ATMs! It was a big marketing tool that we had 32 ATMs, and then the first bank also to pay out 1 billion Naira in cash.

And then 97% of our customer transactions occurred in the banking hall. Today, UBA opens about 500,000 accounts every month, and these accounts—95% are opened online, not in the banking hall! Number two: transaction count. We have over 98% of our customer transactions now occurring online, not in the banking hall.

Again, in terms of ATMs, UBA alone has close to 4,000 ATMs in Nigeria—all from that early picture! And of course, POS machines uncountable. There were no POS machines before! So things have changed, and they will change further. Technology is disrupting a lot of things, not just in the U.S. or in the West, but everywhere—even healthcare. In our healthcare sector today, healthcare can be delivered digitally online. So we live in a new world, and every one of us is adopting and adapting faster to the new world we are living in.

You mentioned energy a little earlier, which makes me nervous because it seems as though you're reading my mind, because that's where I want to go next. Last year, the Africa Energy Chamber recognized you as one of the 25 most influential individuals in shaping Africa's energy sector. I'm curious to know, especially knowing that sustainability and renewable energy is a really important subject that gets studied here and talked about a lot: what are the most pressing issues and solutions being discussed right now as it relates to energy in Africa, and also, I would love to know a little bit more about the work that you're doing through Transcorp to address this?  

So access to electricity is extremely poor in Africa. Less than 35% of our people have access to reliable electricity on the continent. This is a continent of young people—over 700 million people are young on the continent, under the age of 30, and yet access to electricity is almost impossible. These young ones are in a very competitive world. They are going to compete with children who are used to 24/7 uninterrupted electricity supply.  

So the world we see ahead is actually frightening, because the divide we want to bridge is not just happening in the digital space, it's happening because of lack of access to reliable energy on the continent. And from the work we do at the Tony Elumelu Foundation, from our close interaction with young Africans, male and female, we know, we can tell, we see, we hear, listen to them that access to electricity is a major hindrance and constraint on their ability to succeed.  

This is why most—I'm sure at Stanford you must have seen this in your business research studies—most small and medium-scale enterprises on the continent die. They don't succeed. And the single most important factor for this is poor access to electricity.

So to us as a group, we believe in the concept and philosophy of Africapitalism, which is a call on the private sector to play a role in developing the continent. It's a realization that the private sector has a role to play in developing the continent. And in practicalizing this and not just speaking to it, we decided that the power sector was critical for us to invest in. And so we mobilized resources and invested in this space.  

Today, we have capacity to generate about 2,000 megawatts of electricity, but we have some other hindrances like gas supply and grid connectivity, so we're able to generate about 700 megawatts out of the capacity of 2,000. But we're happy that we're playing a key role in this area.  

But my message always has been to investors: we've started on this trip, we started from Washington, we've been to New York... Our message, my message has been consistent: we have opportunities in Africa. There's huge opportunity in Africa. A huge population, income per capita has improved and is improving, and we lack access to electricity on the continent.

So as the world mobilizes towards a more inclusive society, as the world mobilizes to a more prosperous world, I always like to remind people that we cannot have that prosperity across the world if we do not deal with the issue of access to electricity on the African continent.

The reason we have youth unemployment in Africa is attributable to this. The reason we have youth restiveness in Africa is attributable to this. The reason some embrace extremism is attributable to this. In fact, government's ability to fight extremism is also limited by this. So at times you see communities and large spaces that do not feel any impact of government or society because there is no access to electricity.  

So for me, it's not just a commercial investment; it's what we should be doing in the 21st century to help improve access to electricity. And I can never shout or say enough, and I want to have more people in this crusade: that all of us, those who have capital, should look at investing in Africa. There are opportunities there. And those who have voices, let's keep shouting to attract attention. So that collectively, all of us can make a difference in Africa.

I want to spend some time on what you mentioned earlier: Africapitalism, which you are known across Nigeria and other countries as being a strong proponent of. I'm curious to know why you believe that Africa needs to take a unique approach to capitalism?

Well, it's not a unique approach to capitalism per se; it's, for me, a realization. At times, there's this entitlement mentality that people have: "Okay, we should be helped, we should be supported, we should be developed." But for goodness' sake, it can't be like that forever! We need to help ourselves too.

So it's a realization that the private sector has also grown, is growing. We need government to prioritize, we need government to create the right environment for the private sector to keep doing well, but the private sector also must be sensible and reasonable and conscientious in how we do things. We should invest in a manner that helps to catalyze prosperity. We should invest in a manner that helps to create social equity, social wealth. We should invest in a manner that helps to create inclusiveness.  

So this is not just about a new form of capitalism or the other; it's more about the fact that the private sector should play a role in helping to develop the continent. Let's stop blaming others for our woes. Let me stop blaming others for everything. Let's lead, and hopefully they follow.  

And I've seen it happen. Some of the investments we made, we did not invest all the capital ourselves. We reached out, and we see that the world we live in is becoming highly interdependent, and people also begin to listen, especially when we show good examples.  

So it's a call on all of us in the private sector—whether in Africa or outside the world—that we have a role to play in advancing society. Again, the meeting I attended in L.A., it all had different names today: patient capital, impact investing, shared prosperity, mutual destinies. We just need to invest in a manner that's not just about profits for the investors; we should invest in a manner that creates mutual benefits for everyone: for the investors, for communities where you do business, for society at large.  

The fact that we do what we do at the Tony Elumelu Foundation—committing 100 million U.S. dollars to supporting African entrepreneurs—it's not because we have so much money, but we also know that some of the basic needs we want to have are provided. So it's not about what we have in the bank accounts; it's about how can we take a part of it and share. But for me, not even sharing in a manner that creates a dependency, perpetual dependency—no! In a manner that makes you stand on your own, it makes you self-reliant.  

And so when we say we'll give non-refundable seed capital of $5,000, and when we do so... to date, over 16,000 Africans have benefited from that program. It is not to encourage laziness—no! But we know, in San Francisco, we're in a tech environment, we know some started with less than $5,000, but today they've grown big. So we just want to give young Africans access, opportunity—opportunity to prove their concept, and then let others see them as good and come and invest in them.

So we need all the private sector playing a role. We need everyone. We need the private sector looking at critical sectors. Today we just spoke about electricity: instead of people keeping their money in bank accounts abroad, why don't you bring your money to invest in the power sector on the continent? You make more money, but you also impact society in a more positive way. That is the entire essence of it.

So we need more private sector leaders showing the way, but we need also our public sector leaders creating the right environment that will enable the private sector to do so. And we need friends of Africa, development partners, to also begin to look at how they intervene, how they engage, and how they give in the 21st century, with the aim to create self-reliance and independence rather than perpetuating the syndrome of dependency.  

Now Tony, typically when people retire from very high-stress jobs such as being the CEO of one of the largest banks in Africa, they take a vacation! You instead decided to found a company, Heirs Holdings, and also the Foundation that you've alluded to. I'm curious... this was a few years ago, I'm curious about what you saw happening in Nigeria or beyond at that time that drove, that was the impetus for you to develop this foundation?  

We did two things when I retired in 2010, 12 years ago. We decided to create a family office, which was to some extent novel in our part of the world. And we said the family office will be quite catholic in the kind of investment that we make, hence this philosophy of Africapitalism. So Heirs Holdings is the epitome and the home of our overall group, anchored on the philosophy of Africapitalism.

And we decided the sectors that we considered very important that we have to move the needle: power. Nigeria and Africa are endowed with a lot of resources, yet we do not have the ability to process all of this and convert them to the state that they can become valuable to our people. So we said energy, from an integrated point of view, across the credit value chains. We looked at the healthcare sector, and we said health is important, that we need to invest in the healthcare sector. So these were the key. Of course, real estate in urban Africa, and hospitality. Hospitality—if you want to grow a country, an economy, transportation and hospitality are critical for this. So those are the things we decided to do at the time. The motivation was to help drive our philosophy of capitalism further, but equally important, to help manage the investments, and wanted Heirs Holdings to be the go-to investment partner on the continent, to help attract investment to the continent. And so far, so good on that.  

On the other hand, the second thing we did was the Foundation. I thought that my story has been one of... this element of luck in my story, this element of being at the right place at the right time. And I wasn't the most intelligent in my class, you know, and also I wasn't the most hard-working of certain people I knew. And therefore, there must be luck in it that I am who I am, what I became.

And I thought... you know, I had risen very rapidly, done quite a lot, and I thought it was time to commit the second phase of my life to helping to impact humanity, to helping to democratize that luck that I had growing up, to help expand access to opportunities, to help people. I mean, you spoke about parents; I said my mother was a small-scale entrepreneur, not the kind of vigor I see. And so I was not like a son of any known family, so to speak—just a regular family person.

And I've been inspired by what I see around the world. Look at Steve Jobs, for instance, and his background. And I asked myself: Steve Jobs, if he were in Africa, if he were an African in Nigeria, would he have been able to succeed at the scale and magnitude he succeeded? I mean, long after his death, a company he founded crossed $1 trillion in market cap, and just recently $3 trillion!

So it's all of these that drove me to say: no, it would be unfortunate... I don't know what I would say to God if I do not create... I'll have to create more Tony Elumelus on the continent of Africa, for instance! And that was what drove my wife and I at the time to decide that we should commit 100 million U.S. dollars to helping to identify, support, and empower the new generation of African business leaders, and to do it at a scale and magnitude that's never been done before.

Given that we do business in many African countries, we decided not to make it a Nigerian issue, but an African issue. Given that we know that poverty anywhere is a threat to all of us everywhere, we decided to make sure that it's broader. And so that is why we started the Tony Elumelu Foundation.

So the motivation for starting the Tony Elumelu Foundation is to help democratize luck, create access to people whether or not you are a rich man's child or a prominent person's child. If you have ideas, you're enthusiastic, you're committed, ambitious, applied, and sector-agnostic, we will give you the opportunity.  

And so when I look back today, I see that as a major, major achievement. What we have done, the happiness I see on the faces of these young Africans, keeps me going.

My final question for you: You seem to be a nation in and of yourself! Through the foundation, you've worked with local governments, international governing bodies to help move capital where it's most needed. And so I'm sure you've heard it asked many times before: Nigeria is now in its election season. I will join the chorus: Why aren't you running for president?  

I didn't see that coming! I think first is, when I look around, I know the potential that we have as a continent and as a people. I see opportunities. I know that life can be a lot better for people, and oftentimes you feel the urge to show interest in how we are governed and how things happen.  

But I soon also realized that because I've never been selfish, because I've never been self-centered, because it's never been to me that it must be Tony, I say to myself: if there are other good people, capable people who are in the race, who are showing interest, why don't you support them and share with them what you think should be the right thing in terms of leadership, in terms of governance in 21st century Africa, where people have suffered and continue to suffer so much?  

You know, I realized also that all of us cannot be in the political space, but I know that evil succeeds or thrives in the world when good people keep quiet. So I said to myself, just the way I'm committed to entrepreneurship, committed to helping to empower young Africans, we should support the emergence and orchestration of good governance across the continent, because I think that is what has held us back as Africans.

So for me, it's not just Nigeria, it's about many countries on the continent. So I am interested in good governance, and I know that what we preach and advocacy and everything we do trying to encourage young people will not succeed if in the political space our leadership is not good. So mine is to continue to encourage the evolution of the political process that will bring about good leadership, and to ensure that our leaders stay accountable.

That process is not there yet, but we are working together. When I was in Washington, I said to political leadership here too that it should be a concerted effort: you should encourage people on the continent to do what is right, even as we also from the continent continue to speak and harp on good governance and accountability.

Thank you so much, Tony. That was amazing. And typically, we like to close with a lightning round of questions, so I have four for you, and I'm going to say them and you have to answer as quickly as possible—hence the lightning part!  

So aside from Palo Alto, California, what's your favorite place to visit? What's your favorite place to travel to?  

Oh, I just came from L.A., Los Angeles. I love Los Angeles!  

Now, with Nigeria out of the World Cup, who are you rooting for?

Wow, even my boys, they were like crying when Nigeria dropped! I think... I think Nigeria!

What is your favorite Wizkid song?

I don't know that... You have to play it!

And last question: What are you most grateful for?

I'm grateful to God for my wife and family and children. I think, you know, you can't do well in life if you don't have a home that's at peace. I do have a very peaceful home, and my children are reinforcing too, so I'm grateful to God for that.  

Thank you so much!