How do we do it? Absolutely fair question. The reason that we've talked a lot I think or come to a lot of focus on entrepreneurship through unemployment is this sort of sense of you guys trying to take big issues like unemployment into your own hands and create a solution. Then you see people doing amazing stuff like James Eder and you go, "Gee, you know, I could do that and create 40 jobs myself," obviously. But what we do know, not everybody has been put in a situation where they have the means to fail fast or fail forward or fail in setting up a business. Okay? And trust me, I've set up a business before, and it wasn't great.

And then, you know, you look at something like Ariana who's just completely amazing, and you go... and Branson as well. So what does it take to do that?

So what we've been doing is we've had a couple of Google Hangouts with Doug Richard, who in the UK is one of those... those of you who know the program The Dragons' Den, used to be on Dragons' Den. Doug is an entrepreneur himself and a brilliant one. And as I told you yesterday, his mom just died, so he will be carrying on after the summit with these Google Hangout how-to sessions. So I do urge all of you... sometimes the One Young World team in London will be in touch with you and ask you to participate visually in one of the little boxes on the Google Hangout. We can't have all of you in there obviously, but I would say to you, do keep your eyes open when Louise and the gang are posting how-tos with people like Doug, because there is such good... some of those sessions, honestly, it's like going to university and getting half an hour with someone who's really magic. And the stuff is there. Equally, Mr. Nunn's dialogues online. I know one of the Google Hangouts that he did on agriculture and agribusiness was just phenomenal stuff that you can't learn anywhere else.

So to bring that live to you today, I'm going to bring back to the stage returning ambassador, returning counselor Carol Stone. Carol is an entrepreneur herself, quite apart from being the most well-connected... Hello Carol!

When Carol was first a counselor with Bishop Desmond Tutu when we were in Zurich, the pair of them ran onto the stage, and David said to me, "If Desmond Tutu and Carol Stone had a baby, how much energy would that be? How delightful!"

So Carol is going to run the session with Bethlehem Alemu, who you met earlier, who's African Entrepreneur of the Year. Carol, thank you very much indeed.

Well, first of all, this is all about how to be an entrepreneur. Who here wants to be an entrepreneur? Good, a good number! Well, you can be. You can be one now when you're young, you can be one middle-aged, you can be one a bit later on. That's a wonderful thing. You've got an idea, you've got an inspiration, you can do it.

Now, I started work at 18. I was a secretary. I worked from 9:00 in the morning till 5:00 at night and thought that would be my life. And for a lot of the time, it was my life. But then towards the end of that working life, I did actually establish an opinion market research company, asking people what they thought about issues of the day. And in fact, it was that very company that first asked what young people wanted to discuss at One Young World, so I was very, very proud of it. I was 65. That was six years ago; I'm now 71. So I started very late! And what's more, I got married for the first time at 57, but that's not on the agenda!

So I'm saying you can do it when you want to, but of course, I'd rather you start perhaps younger than that. But for someone who did start much younger, that Kate mentioned, we've already heard from this morning, really is proof that there's huge potential for investment in Africa, which is a wonderful thing. And she is the CEO and founder of the ethical footwear company soleRebels, and she's created lots of jobs in her home country of Ethiopia. Forbes magazine said she was a woman to watch. For us, she's a woman to hear. A welcome to Bethlehem Alemu!

There she is! Welcome. Thank you.

Well, we heard from Bethlehem this morning, and she sort of rather skated over how she actually got the business off the ground. She said that one or two banks refused her, but she got people around her and she started it. So I want to know just a little bit more. If I... you were about 25, were you?

Yes, mid-20s.

Much, much younger than me, 40 years earlier! She suddenly decided she wanted to... First of all, how on earth did you decide shoes?

That's a really good question, and I get that question all the time. And I'm going to explain it again. Why shoes is... the way I grew up, I've been watching people doing things by hand, which really interested me to mobilize the community in the business. One of the things that people do when I grew up, when I see, is spinning, which is a culture that we had, and weaving—people create a lot of fabrics from it.

So we had another culture, which is recycled tire shoes. People were wearing that recycled tire shoe for different reasons. First, it was cheap to buy. The second one is it was durable—you can wear them every time, they can last for a year or two. So I see those two opportunities working together. So I use the talent that I have around me, and I use the idea of recycled tires. So I came up with an idea of producing products from that.

And how did you actually get those people around you? Did you suddenly, when you couldn't get anything from the first banks, how did you get that funding?

Actually, I didn't get any funding when I started my company. And I want to make sure that everybody here who wants to be an entrepreneur, to do not go back because people refuse you. What I would like to say is, if you have any idea and if you believe in yourself, your idea can be bigger even if people say, "Well, this is not the idea that I'm going to support." But you believing in yourself and being passionate about what you do is the big bonus for you, because nobody is responsible for your life but you.

So I grew up in Ethiopia, but I have seen a lot of people working every day to make it through, to go through in different places and to make it through for a day. I see people struggling to have food in their mouths, versus there is a lot of people who are supposed to support the community. So if you want to be an entrepreneur, have a clear vision in what you are about to do. And then there is a lot of challenges, of course. You're going to come up with the challenges to solve your own problems.

Well, David Jones, our co-founder of One Young World, wrote a book a short while ago called Who Cares Wins, meaning that people don't mind, young people, anyone doesn't mind a business making profit, but they do want them to give something back to society. Now, I think you formed a crèche, haven't you, for children?

Yes.

Already? How do you take that? Did you automatically have a social conscience?

Yes, when we started the company, because we said we're going to empower our own people, we invest in the people themselves. So to be a social entrepreneur, you have to blend the idea of social community service inside your business. So when you do that, it's working together and then it's going to be easier. It's going to be hard once you form the company to be able to be a socially conscious company. It's a little bit tough. But it's already blended in, and I always say that soleRebels, from the beginning, in our DNA, we're a fair trade company.

So to get a fair trade organization certificate, it's just to have a transparency between us and our customers, because these days people are saying, "We're a fair trade company." How are you proving that? What's your criteria to be a fair trade company? So that's what we do.

So to the people who had their hands up, what hope or inspiration can you give them? Would you say probably half of them will succeed? If they fail, certainly try again. But what was the moment when you thought, "This company is going to succeed"? Was it the first order? Was it somebody first saying what wonderful shoes? What was it? And what sizes do you do? Because I take a size 10.

We can go to size 44. We can go to size 15. So we can really... you can order online if you want custom-made products also.

So what was that moment when you thought, "This is going to be a successful company"? The first order, the first time someone wrote about it—what was it?

Well, the challenge is that even if you have a big idea, even if you shake the world, being in Ethiopia, being in Africa, is the biggest challenge that I see. If I was born in the States or somewhere outside Africa, can you imagine where my company is going to be? So the market that people build for us is down there. So you have to break into the market, because when people see businesses, they always want to see somebody else behind them, right?

So we have to break into that. Your idea, really big idea, and you have to be able to manage and register your trademarks, things like that, in the right way. Because the formula is the same for me and somebody from the United States, because it's a competition, right? It's a global business. So it doesn't give me any opportunity if I don't compete with other companies in the right way.

Okay, then let's take it back just a bit from the practical. How much do you have to actually persevere? Did you have setbacks? Did you have setbacks before you had success?

A lot! Every day, actually. The challenges come every day. But one of the barriers was the market—to win the market, to win customers. That's a big challenge. Even if you have a big product, good product, sustainable product, to win the market, you have to really work hard.

People say you have to do 10,000 hours to be the best in the market, whatever you're doing. But in my mind, I did 40,000 hours because I spend more time in my company and to really see what's going on in the market, how I'm winning the market, what customers are looking for from their brand, and how am I going to create a job opportunity inside my community and outside my country also. Because soleRebels is a global business today.

We managed to hire more than 20 people outside Ethiopia, which is a big bonus for us, because whenever we open soleRebels stores, we hire local people. For example, we opened a branded store in Taiwan—six stores. So we don't bring in Ethiopian people to manage the stores; we hire local people, which is Taiwanese. When we open a store in Switzerland, we hire local people there too. So in South Korea, everywhere. So we do have 140 people working for soleRebels, but bigger than that, we do have 20 international workers for soleRebels.

And just for the practical side, I mean, if you're going to write a business plan first, if you're going to take it to a bank, if you're going to go to a private investor, what would you give as...

I did not go to the bank, but I did go to an organization who have a specific program for women who want to start a business, but I didn't get any support. But that pushed me really to the end that I'm going to do it by myself, and I'm going to use whatever support and whatever ideas that I can get around me.

And my thinking is, if you're running a business, you don't have to run it as a charity. If it is a business, you have to really win the market. You have to be strong, and then you have to control your own destination. Don't let people control you, because it's your idea. Even if people invest in your company, make sure that you're in control of your own destiny.

Well, you say it's your own idea. What about the problem of, in television for example, where I've been some of my life, people can pinch a program idea and put that program on? What about intellectual property? What about someone pinching your ideas of shoes?

That's a really good question. After I launched my brand, there are a lot of companies coming to Ethiopia to invest, which is really good because they open a factory and they start their business and then hire local people. The problem starts when they steal your intellectual property. Even if they are coming, even if they are a foreign company, they cannot win... that doesn't mean that they win the market because of different reasons—because of infrastructure, probably because of the product that they're producing, because people were doing the same thing for the last 20 years, they're just following in a different form.

So you make sure that your idea is your own by registering your trademark and what you do. That's really important, because if people see if you don't know what to do about your intellectual property, people are going to steal it—your name. That means they're going to take your face off, they're going to put it on their face to sell your product. And it's not fair to do that.

What happened was, like a month before, somebody, a competitor from my country who's working in the same industry, stole my intellectual property, registered my domain name, forwarded it to his website. Whenever people type in solerebels.com, it's going to his website. He's selling his product. Do you think that's fair? No!

If somebody really does that on soleRebels, on me, what's going on on the ground for startups and other entrepreneurs? So you make sure that you secure your intellectual property. I do have this kind of really good audience and then stage to talk about it. There is a lot of people who are entrepreneurs, who are doing good in their territory, but they cannot really have this opportunity to talk about it. So wherever you are, if you're in Ethiopia or if you're in South Africa or if you're in the UK, you should have that done.

Thank you. I would have assumed that you'd gone right for business and that you were a single woman. That's not the case?

No, I'm not! I'm married and I have three children.

You can have it all! And in a way, I suppose it spurs you on rather than holds you back?

It's going well, I guess. But sometimes when I travel like this, it's a little bit hard. But my family and my husband have been really supporting me from start to now, and I wish they continue to support me to go forward.

Before we go to questions and answers for the second half, what about the future? What's your next ambition for the company?

Yeah, my next ambition is to be an Apple of Africa.

Is that possible?

Yes, to be an Apple of Africa. Apple is a big company in the world, right? So imagine soleRebels being an Apple of Africa. So that being said, it's not just only an ambition, but we're taking the right points to make that happen. One of the things that we want to do is we do have more than 10 branded stores today, but between 5 to 10 years, we want to have 100 stores all over the world, branded stores by the name of soleRebels. And then we're going to hire 5,000 people inside Ethiopia and another 300 people around the world. That's the plan for soleRebels in the future.

Thank you. Thank you so much. I think we'll now go to questions and answers, because from that number of hands up, there are probably still quite a few questions to ask. I'll take two or three at a time. Someone who's caught my eye in a red shirt down there is James Eder, who started Student Beans. Come up on the stage with your microphone for a moment, James, and tell us what you've done.

Hi everyone, again. I know you've already heard from me for a few minutes, but to really make a point, what I'd just love to do is just ask for one volunteer, please, to put up your hand—just one volunteer to come to the front. I saw you first, just the lady. Can we have a round of applause for the volunteer, please? Thank you very much. Round of applause, a bit louder! It's not easy to come up here. Thank you.

So what I'd like to do is I'd like to give you this book, which I mentioned earlier, some jelly beans, and also my business card. Let me introduce... I'm James.

Your name is?

Isa.

Great, thank you very much. Go and sit down. Round of applause again for the volunteer!

So the reason why I wanted to do that, because it's not about me, it's about you in the room, and it's about taking opportunities you're presented with every single day. Now, that was an opportunity. It was a real opportunity for everyone in the room. I gave you my business card. I'm happy to mentor you, to provide you some free mentoring. But the reason why I did that: why didn't you volunteer?

So I'd like to leave a quote and then hand back or be involved in the Q&A:

"Watch your thoughts, they become words. Watch your words, they become actions. Watch your actions, they become habits. Watch your habits, they become character. Watch your character, it becomes your destiny."
— Frank Outlaw

I just think it's so important—the opportunities that are presented every day, it's whether you take them or not. So thank you very much.

Excellent. If anyone can remember all that, I should be surprised, but I think the gist of it was very, very good advice. Thank you very much indeed, James.

Okay, questions. If you could say who you are and if you're an entrepreneur already, let me know. And where you're from, of course.

Hi, I'm Dion from Montserrat in the Caribbean. I have a question. I own a small business with my mother, it's fast food. My question is: How did your first opportunity come about for you to expand outside of Ethiopia, and how did you go about it?

That's a really good question, because whenever people want to start a business, probably they want to start from local areas, right? But it's different for me. I did not start soleRebels from local, from Ethiopia. I am manufacturing in Ethiopia, actually. I am selling my products in different countries. Why? There are a lot of products coming to Ethiopia from outside, there are no products going out from Ethiopia, and we don't build our name as a competitor out there.

So I really like to challenge myself to break into different boxes. One of the boxes is that we are competitors. Now I am able to compete. I am not here because I have an idea, "I'm going to do this, I'm going to do that next year." But I have done it. I have done it from scratch and I penetrated the market. You could do the same, but make sure that your idea and how you develop your company makes sense for the others.

Thank you. I'm going to take two or three at a time just because I want to get as many as I can. Who are you, where are you from?

Hello, my name is Matthew Duby, I'm from the UK. I just want to ask you directly: What made you make the jump from a stable job into becoming an entrepreneur? Because it's something that I'm looking to do, and it's just what stimulated you to make that jump?

I'll just answer it very quickly. I thought, you never know what might happen, let me take a risk, let's take a chance. We prepared for failure. And so somebody said to me market research would be good for you. So I actually formed a limited company within a PLC, and it was very, very hard work—lots of times crying at weekends, "I can't do this, I'm exhausted, I wish I'd never tried it." But at the end of the day, what I always feel, I'm glad I had a go. Even had I failed, I'd be glad I had a go rather than not try. I sold my company two years ago, or all the shares I had within it, I paid off my mortgage, which is a wonderful feeling, and I'm very, very pleased I had a go. So it was just thinking: do it now, don't wait for the perfect time.

Thank you very much.

Hi, I'm Caleb. Congratulations for the great achievement. My two questions mainly: 1) How do you break into the steep competition against leading brands? 2) How do you go about sourcing for cheaper capital when there are high interest rates?

Yes, thank you. How do you get market outside Ethiopia, right? That's your first question. How do you break against the big brands in the various markets?

Actually, I did not break any big brand. I am another brand who's growing really fast, because my products are really different than the other products, and my message for people is delivered through the products. What I'm selling is not just a product, but I am sharing an experience. People come and see different opportunities in soleRebels. For example, we don't produce one product at a time; we produce more than 150 products in a day, different ones. So when people see that, they believe that it's something different, something new for the market. That's how I get to the market.

The second question is, how did you scale up your business, right? If I put it in one word, I scaled up my business because I do have really good relationships with people who are working with me, and I do have really good partners who have a background in retail marketing and those things. So I really work collaboratively with other people who know the market, who know the industry too. So that's how I get to the market.

Absolutely. To build on that, people do business with people, and exactly like you said, it's the network of people in the room. If you think you're building connections now, that's how you get in and work with bigger organizations and small as well.

I agree with that. As a networker myself, I think when you're here now, do take advantage. You're so lucky to be here and meeting these people. You may come back another year, but make sure you've got people's phone numbers, their emails, their Twitter accounts, whatever you want to know. Keep in touch with them. Remember where you met them, what they looked like—"had a yellow jumper"—so you remember them, whatever it is. Because you may well need them, and if you nurture people, it helps you throughout your life.

Next question.

Hi, my name is Yasin, I'm Sudanese. My question is... well, Sudan is a very beautiful country, but it's also a country that's in constant conflict. It's a country where you have a lot of talented people who are sitting at home. Entrepreneurship is blocked, actively blocked to an extent. Small and mid-sized companies do not always survive. So within such a context, how can we as young people, as entrepreneurs, change such a landscape?

Let me take the man in the yellow jumper as well.

Hi, John George Chawa from Zambia. My question... because from just the time you started explaining, I've gathered a lot of facts which are as clear as daylight. So my question is, how can I upgrade because I'm a social entrepreneur? What I do is to see change in my community in terms of prevention of HIV and AIDS. There are so many problems that I would like to help in my community, but I've got some personal problems. So how can I marry the two—social entrepreneurship and business entrepreneurship?

Thank you. Which one are you going to take first?

Yes, thank you for your questions. I don't know what's going on in Sudan, but people are going to be responsible for whatever they want to do because that's their dream. So in whatever situation... I didn't have a lot of people supporting me from the government, right? I didn't have a lot of people supporting me from organizations, and I don't think that's really important. What's important is your idea and what you want to do about it, and it's about your dream. If you're going to do it, of course we are all going to take risks. Life is a risk, we always take risks. So I would say to you, if you have any idea to develop any business in Sudan, I think it can be done, and you can do it the way I do it. You don't have to conflict with governments and things like that. If people see the change that you are bringing, then they start supporting you. So you'd better start it if you have any ideas to do.

To your question, I don't know what kind of business that you want to do, but I know that you want to empower your community and you want to deliver some kind of message for people to keep themselves from HIV. Is that what you're saying? So I don't know how to create a business starting from an organization to the business. What I know is, start a business and support your community—that can work. You can have some idea and then you can start your business, but you can say you're supporting your community by teaching about HIV/AIDS. I think that's the way to go.

I'm so sorry, we've got so many questions in so little time. I think I'll take one gent over here.

I'm Clinton from South Africa. It's more of a statement as compared to a question.

Good, we like those!

I think the African delegates that are here don't really appreciate what we have at our doorstep at the moment, with corporates looking at us as the final frontier. Before they set up onshore in our continent, here's what we want: partner with our entrepreneurs, give women equity before you set up onshore, and address youth unemployment. So we use this as a negotiating tool before we actually let them set enterprise onto our continent.

Thank you very much. Let the gentleman behind you... Was that a question or a comment?

It's a question. I'm an entrepreneur from Botswana, my name is Dea. I wanted to ask you if you are a first-generation entrepreneur, and if yes, how does it feel to be a first black woman entrepreneur?

I am the first generation in entrepreneurship in my family. My family completely never did business, and they don't have any idea about business. So I am the first generation. And it's really tough to be able to have your own idea and start from scratch sitting in Ethiopia, and using different components like technology, things like that, to scale up your idea and to implement it. It's really tough, but I always believe in myself and my team also: we can do this, and you can do that too.

I'll take the lady here in the purple.

Hi, my name is Saj, I'm from Bahrain. Me and my mom, we own a small business, a handmade business actually. My question is very simple: I have an idea, but I don't know how to implement it to be an entrepreneur. So my question to you is, what are the basic steps or the strategy you took to actually be who you are right now?

Can you make a short answer?

That's a really good question. When I started the business, I felt the same, but I understood that if I empower the workers that I have, if I pay the right amount of money for the talent that they have, and then if I give sustainability for my workers—it's not like they're going to work today, and if something happens, we're going to fire them tomorrow—you're going to have to train your people to be on your side and to believe in what you're doing. That's how I built my team. So I think that helps.

Can I just add one very quick thing to that? It was just around having the vision, but also breaking down what's the first thing that you can do to make a difference to start. Because people put it very much in a big picture, but just see if there's one action that you can do to take that next step, and then the next one, and it builds up.

Thank you very much indeed.

Hi, I am Tan, a social entrepreneur from South Africa. Business has moved from geographical limits onto the internet, and the reality on our continent is that there isn't infrastructure for ICT to support businesses that move onto the internet. What is your advice for people on the African continent, especially young black Africans in townships and underdeveloped areas, for them to move in and compete on the same scale that Europeans and other foreigners are competing in on the net?

Sometimes when you don't have a lot of opportunity, you create the opportunity yourself. Why I'm saying that is, soleRebels is a pioneer of a lot of things. soleRebels is a pioneer of building a brand from scratch and scaling it up to a global level. soleRebels is a brand that started selling products online. How? Because there are companies who can do that, so you can outsource what you need to other companies who can develop that for you. So it doesn't have to be in Ethiopia, it can be done somewhere else.

Thank you very much.

Hi, my name is Kate and I'm an entrepreneur from the United Kingdom. I started my business at the beginning of this year, and we build commercial-scale urban farms that grow sustainable fruit and fish in cities. In the past 10 months, probably everything that could have gone wrong has gone wrong at some point. I wondered, for both of you, what was the worst thing that's gone wrong for you in your business and what you learned from it?

I went to a trade fair in Atlanta with my product to show what I'm doing, and one person came and said, "This is really nice, so I'm going to write you an order." So he wrote an order. He didn't pay. So I was really happy to get orders from somebody from Atlanta. So I took that order, I processed the order, and then I sent the product to him. And he didn't want to pay. So I called his office. Somebody answered the phone: "Is everything okay in Ethiopia?" I was like, "Can you pay my money?" So those are the things that you face every day.

And another thing: somebody ordered... we had a relationship for two years, and for some reason, this company or this person ordered $80,000 worth of shoe products to sell in the UK. So we processed the order, we sent the order to him. The guy completely disappeared after he received the goods. At that time, shall I shut down my company? Because I am a startup, I cannot afford to lose $80,000 worth of products! And sometimes people hit you like that to destroy you, but it doesn't matter, you keep going. There is a lot of catastrophe from somewhere, but you keep going.

My only one is on the very first year I started the company, I took on a woman I thought would be good. She was absolutely vile, bossy, and terrible. I had to keep her for 3 months, because she could stay for the 3 months. She stayed, it was terrible. I'll never do it again!

So thank you very much. Thanks to James Eder for coming in from off stage, which was wonderful. Thank you Bethlehem, and good luck for all you're doing. Well done! Thank you very much, and thank you to you, Carol, as well for sharing.