What would happen if I lost everything?

God forbid. [laughter]

God forbid. I bind it in the name of Jesus.

I send that demon away. Here's an interesting thought experiment. Um like one of my team members was like, what would happen if you lost everything and you had to start again? You lost the venture capital fund, you lost the consulting firm, you lost the board seats, you lost their shares in the different companies and stuff that you've done. You lost the publishing and the publishing rights and all of that stuff. You lost the speaking career. You lost the keynotes. You lost. You lost. You lost. Like all of these things that fill up your time gone. And you were starting all over again in South Africa in 2026. What would you do? I think it's an interesting thought experiment actually. But here's what I can tell you. I wouldn't start another hustle. I certainly wouldn't do another time consulting type of business. And and by the way, I wouldn't trade forex [laughter] or any of these things. But having run a a timebased business in the past, the specific reason we moved out of a timebased business into an investment business was precisely because we realized there is a leverage in getting OPT and OPM, other people's time, other people's money. And in a consulting business, you can get the OPT leverage because you can hire other consultants to work for you. But they're really all you're doing is you're arbitrageing. you're you're getting them at a dollar. You're selling them at $120 or $150 or $160, whatever the case might be. And OPM, other people's money. So, you raise capital and you invest it in stuff. You take 2% 2% of the capital you've you're managing and you earn 20% of the carried interest. But that take that's a time game as well. You've got to wait for those underlying portfolio companies to to mature.

So, how would I do it? You know, if I look at some of the stuff that we do in our school of scale, in our school of scale, I get to see all kinds of clients that we've got a a fashion business. We've got an uh an fashion apparel business. We've got a guy who does fragrances. Great business. Great business. He does fragrances. He's in he's in South Africa. He's in Dubai. And he's uh he's in Joelberg, Dubai, and Los Angeles. Great business. He does fragrance and apparel. We've got a baby uh baby hardware business. We've got an agricultural business as a client in Ghana. I've got a a publishing business as a client in the US. Um, let me think, I've got an engineering business in South Africa. We've got a water uh purification and services business that operates in South Africa, Zambia, and Angola. So, we've got like a vast array of clients that we work with in in our school of scale. So, I get to see like a lot of these different businesses and what the unit economics looks like. Everything from a logistics client that we have in the northern part of Namibia all the way straight through to a marketing consulting business that we have in Atlanta, Georgia, right? As my daughter would say, Atlanta, Georgia, right? Like we have different clients all over the world. And so the question is if I had to do it over again, how would I do it?

I think that we've been sold a lie and that lie is on this thing called small business. I hate the idea. I absolutely detest it. And I've often said to you guys before, it's okay to start small, just don't stay small. One of my most viral keynotes that I ever did was at the TEDx in Namibia close on 10 years ago now. And the title of the keynote was the big the big lie of small business. And I talk about how we have been mentally conditioned to think that all we are worth is these small businesses. And so we think in small business terms. We we don't think about how do we take our our our stockfell and convert it into a collective investment scheme and then into a cooperative bank. We don't do those things. We tend to stay in the stockfell realm. We don't think about how do we take our spaza shop and then turn it into a buying group and then eventually to become like an independent cash and carry or um a spa, right? We don't think like that. We tend to think in spaza shops. And so I detest the idea that all we are is the small businesses. So I'm [snorts] such a big fan of my sister Nom Fondo who built it to the funeral group, right? Because she understood the advantage of scale and she's built a um an international business. A lot of people don't are not aware of this. She doesn't just operate in South Africa, but she actually operates a global business. And so if I had to do it over again, what would I do? There are three principles I need to share with you before I help you understand what I would do. The first principle, as I've said to you before, businesses don't compete with businesses. Products don't compete with products. Supply chains don't compete with supply chains. Value chains compete with value chains. And so I would focus on a business that would allow me the opportunity to build a strong value chain and utilize that value chain for growth and for scale. That's the first thing I would do. I would also focus on a business that would make me money as I sleep. In other words, where the product is constantly either in utilization or in transaction, whether or not I'm the person selling it. Something that has to do with a strong logistical framework, something that's about moving products and that's about touching hundreds of people's lives. That's probably what I would do. The other things for you to consider, right? Like right now in 2026, South Africa has this very brief window. The operation Vintlea, which the president Ramaphorsa started in 2020, um had those five key milestones. It was around the the transformation of the ports. They've done that. It was around uh fixing the rail uh infrastructure in part. They've done that. It was around the financial action um uh treatment uh financial action task force thing which had to do with the gray listing of South Africa. They've done that too. And now, of course, with the Africa Free Trade Agreement, there are all of these like macro factors that would just make it so much easier for me to get into a business that operates in a value chain environment that's about uh leveraging logistics, selling a product at scale. That's probably something that I would be looking at um at doing. I would also think want to do something that has to do with the middle class, something that is targeting the middle class and not necessarily the middle class as my um direct customers, but perhaps the middle class as the consumers of the people who would be my direct customers. So in so far as the economics forecasting, I tend to be a bit more hawkish. I'm I'm I'm a bit more David on this. uh you know I watched an interview of his recently on Sakalik and he spoke about how his anticipation is that we'll grow it's sub 1% again he said anything between 0.9 and like 1.1% is he thinks the the the the range I think he's right I think that we have we have a decade of of Treasury constantly proving that they overestimate um what they think is going to be the the growth rate of the country and then they constantly have to revise it down so that would be another macro factor that I would consider but that notwithstanding the middle class in in Africa generally is still resilient and a number of that middle class is also numb to the volatility right like if you are in Lei in Lekki or in Victoria Island where I was the other day in in [snorts] Nigeria those people are going to spend what they're going to spend on the products that they need um it really isn't dependent on if if you're in Karin in in Nairobi the people who living in Karin and Nairobi are going to spend what they need to spend to put decent food on the table send their kids to school and all of those things. It really doesn't depend on some of the uh the the the the more pressing issues that people in the lower stratus of society would would face. So that's definitely something that I would uh that I would consider. Um I already spoke to you guys about the logistics thing. I've just got some notes here that I made when I was thinking about this. I already spoke to you guys about the logistics thing. So if you look at Pier 2, right, uh that's now been uh through that partnership with ICT um SI is now operating. We there's been a reduction of truck turnaround times I think from 10 days to 48 hours. All of those are you know it's pretty clear that when the government partners with the private sector to allow the private sector the ability to operate public infrastructure we achieve efficiencies. This is why I believe in the quasi model. I think you don't want the private sector owning these assets but certainly allowing the private sector to operate these assets is a mega mega thing that you definitely should be doing. the rail network uh for for intent and purposes now operate private operators are moving lithium and manganesees throughout the rail network the the the arteries of trade are unblocked and I think that makes a big big difference it makes a major major difference because it means the velocity of the economy is picking up it means things are moving faster and you know at the end of the day [snorts] that actually matters so what would I do um you know one of the businesses that we're we're busy working with now in school of scale is a great business run by a young guy called man. I don't have the permission to share the the company's name. Uh he's based out in Ghana and they're an agricultural business and and I think that he's happened upon something. Um in fact I was looking at the stats uh the other day. Let me see. Here we go. In subsaharan Africa 37% to 50% of all food produced is lost. It never reaches the plate. 37 to 50% of all food produced is lost. It never reaches the plate. It rots in the fields and it rots in the trucks. It never makes it to the consumer. Half the yield of the farmers doesn't make it to the consumer. That's a crazy number, right? Crazy number. Um, and if you look at that from a a TAM perspective, it's about a $4 billion economic opportunity gone, burnt money that you'll never get back. and all just because we don't have strong coal chains. I was in Aur in Onondor on state in Nigeria uh this time last year actually [snorts] and um I was speaking at a conference there and there's a there's a massive Shopright store in Akur in state. I was speaking at the global uh global entrepreneurship um um forum uh platform. So anyway, I head over to uh the shop right whilst there I set up my security taken to the shop right because anytime I'm traveling the world when I see South African businesses I love visiting them just to see how they operating. So I went into the store and I was talking to one or two of the people and I I think they were like why is this guy probing so much and asking so many questions cuz I was asking like so what's your retail mix? What's your product mix? What's your merchandising? Um how do you price? How do you do uh production? And how do you manage your coal chains, your supply chains? Cuz you're shop, right? Right. Like, you know, if if the if the if the largest part of your goods that you're trading and selling are coming from South Africa, how do you get them into Nigeria at scale consistently and not break that supply chain? And I think that's in large part one of the reasons why they they they might might have made that decision to pull out of that business. Um, but a lot of those supply chains across the continent run on diesel. Um and a lot of those in particular the coal chains a lot of those coal chains run on diesel and and a number of the small farmers simply can't afford the diesel to operate a strong robust uh coal chain. So the question you ask is what would I do? I would build Hey, here's a good one. Cold storage as a service. Let me explain. So cooling as a service like you take solar efficiency which by the way has skyrocketed now. One of my good friends Hine operates in the space. We had him on an episode of ideas that matter runs Herold's group. I think they the largest in the continent doing this as an independent company. Um and when I was looking at the unit economics of of solar technology when he was sharing it with me these numbers are crazy now. They're like crazy cheap. It's crazy cheap the the the cost per kilowatt hour on on solar now. So what I would do is I would get containerized refrigeration facilities that use hybrid power. So you have a portion grid, a portion solar with a po portion inverter. So some sort of storage battery facility. And then I would say to the farmers or the agricultural producers from around the area, when you've produced a product, you can simply bring it to my cooling facilities and I will keep it here for you because I can extend the shelf life. That's what I would do, right? It's a great business, services the the middle class. It answers a real problem that exists. It's infinitely scalable and you can take it into about 80% of the continent with strong strong support. And any of you who are watching this, if you go and do this, I want my 10%. Don't watch my stuff and come and take my ideas and then you don't pay me. And the great thing about a business like that is it's because it's it's a productled business. It's not a serviceled business. I'm not selling time. Because I'm answering a problem that is a large scale problem, it means I've got infinite opportunity for upside growth and momentum. Um, because I'm answering a product that is also a problem that is happening in situ. It means I I I have the opportunity to develop really really strong distribution networks. And because it's in an an ecosystem that already exists, there are already producers, there are farmers, and there are consumers. It means I'm I was simply plugging into an ecosystem that already exists. And I would be making just so much more impact. So much more impact. So when you think about value, you've really got to understand what that actually means. And in my mind, value means the thing that you do that for you um costs a dollar, but for the person receiving it makes $2 worth of impact. That additional dollar between what it costs you and what the impact they get, that's the value that you've created in society. That's what I would do if I was starting my life all over again in 2026. Notice this said nothing about Tik Tok shorts, nothing about social media, nothing about that stuff because I think uniquely for where Africa is and the challenges that we've got, it really is for us about how do we answer questions on the base route, at the grassroot and making difference for people and people's lives. Tell me what you would do if you were starting a business in 2026. Hit subscribe, like, share, comment. Cheers.